c a r d i o p u l m o n a r y i m a g i n g • c l i n i c a l pe r s p e c t i ve
ajlan et al.
ct in mers-cov infection

downloaded from www.ajronline.org by purdue university library tss on 11/12/19 from ip address 128.211.185.213. copyright arrs. for personal use only; all rights reserved

cardiopulmonary imaging
clinical perspective

middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (mers-cov) infection:
chest ct findings
amr m. ajlan1
rayan a. ahyad2
lamia ghazi jamjoom1
ahmed alharthy 3
tariq a. madani 4
ajlan am, ahyad ra, jamjoom lg, alharthy a,
madani ta

keywords: coronavirus, ct, high-resolution ct, middle
eastern respiratory syndrome (mers), middle eastern
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov),
organizing pneumonia
doi:10.2214/ajr.14.13021
received april 19, 2014; accepted after revision
may 17, 2014.
1

cardiothoracic imaging unit, department of radiology,
king abdulaziz university hospital, king abdulaziz
university, jeddah, western region, saudi arabia.
address correspondence to a. m. ajlan
(amrajlan@yahoo.com).

2
department of radiology, king faisal specialist
hospital and research center, jeddah, western region,
saudi arabia.
3
department of radiology, king abdulaziz university
hospital, king abdulaziz university, jeddah,
western region, saudi arabia.
4
department of medicine, king abdulaziz university
hospital, king abdulaziz university, jeddah,
western region, saudi arabia.

ajr 2014; 203:782–787
0361–803x/14/2034–782
© american roentgen ray society

782

objective. the purpose of this study was to describe the chest ct findings in seven
patients with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) infection.
conclusion. the most common ct finding in hospitalized patients with mers-cov
infection is that of bilateral predominantly subpleural and basilar airspace changes, with more
extensive ground-glass opacities than consolidation. the subpleural and peribronchovascular
predilection of the abnormalities is suggestive of an organizing pneumonia pattern.

i

n september 2012, the acute viral respiratory disease known as
middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) was first reported in saudi arabia [1]. mers is caused by a
novel virus currently named mers coronavirus (mers-cov) [1, 2]. since then, cases
of mers have been identified in jordan, qatar, the united arab emirates, kuwait,
oman, tunisia, germany, france, the united
kingdom, and italy [3]. in april 2014, an increase in the number of mers-cov cases in
saudi arabia and the united arab emirates
was reported to the world health organization (who) [4]. new cases have been recently reported in yemen, egypt, greece,
malaysia, the philippines, and the united
states [5]. a history of recent travel from
saudi arabia or the united arab emirates
was documented in all cases recently reported outside the middle east. as of may 9,
2014, 536 laboratory-confirmed cases have
been reported to the who, and 145 of these
patients have died [5].
proven cases of mers-cov have been
acquired both in the community and
health care settings [2, 6, 7]. the source of
mers-cov is not yet clear, but the origin
of the infection has been linked to camels
[8, 9]. an association with bats has been
proposed as well [10]. although not clearly
documented in all cases, most patients acquire the illness through person-to-person
transmission [2, 11]. the clinical presentation of mers varies from mild to severe,
but most reported patients developed severe
illness, resulting in a high case-fatality rate

[2]. mers-cov has been detected in previously healthy patients and patients with
known comorbidities, with a larger number
of reported cases in the latter group [2]. patients with hypertension, diabetes, cardiomyopathy, chronic renal failure, malignancy, and decreased immunity appear to be at
a higher risk of developing severe disease.
presenting symptoms include fever, cough,
chills, dyspnea, myalgia, abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea [1, 2, 6, 11].
laboratory abnormalities that have been
encountered with mers include thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, leukopenia, elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (ldh),
elevated aspartate aminotransferase (ast),
elevated alanine aminotransferase (alt),
and abnormal renal function tests [2, 6, 7,
11]. superinfection from viral or bacterial
causes has been found in some patients and
may complicate the course of the disease
[11]. severe cases of mers may require
intensive care and mechanical ventilation,
with a relatively large number of patients
progressing to respiratory or renal failure
[1, 2, 7, 11, 12]. to our knowledge, no vaccine or specific antiviral agents are currently available against mers-cov [11, 12].
despite a number of recent publications
on mers, the description of the imaging
features of this disease is sparse and limited to nonimaging medical literature [2,
12]. both airspace and interstitial opacities
have been described on chest radiographs of
mers. radiographic findings may be subtle or extensive, unilateral or bilateral, and
focal or diffuse. the airspace opacities have

ajr:203, october 2014

downloaded from www.ajronline.org by purdue university library tss on 11/12/19 from ip address 128.211.185.213. copyright arrs. for personal use only; all rights reserved

ct in mers-cov infection
been nonspecific, described as focal, segmental, lobar, patchy, nodular, or confluent,
whereas the interstitial changes have been
described as reticular or reticulonodular. total lung opacification and thickening of the
bronchovascular markings have been reported as well. chest ct findings in mers are
even less clearly described and have been reported as bilateral patchy or extensive opacities [2, 12]. it has been noted that imaging
features consistent with acute respiratory
distress syndrome were typically identified
in sicker patients [12]. the purpose of this
study was to review and better describe the
chest ct findings of laboratory-confirmed
mers-cov cases.
materials and methods
subjects
approval for this study was obtained from
the local research ethics committees of two

hospitals; informed consent was waived. a retrospective review of the electronic archives at
both hospitals was searched for all ct-imaged
laboratory-confirmed mers-cov cases. all
cases were confirmed by respiratory samples
tested by real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr). the rrtpcr targeted the mers-cov rna upstream
region of the e gene and confirmed the result
by targeting the open reading frame orf1a and
orf1b regions, as previously described [13,
14]. a final cohort of seven cases was identified for our study. the available clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings were evaluated in
all seven patients.

imaging techniques
mdct was performed using one of the following ct scanners: 16-mdct lightspeed
(ge healthcare), 64-mdct discovery 750 hd
(ge healthcare), 64-mdct sensation (siemens

a

c
ajr:203, october 2014

healthcare), or second-generation dual-source
128-mdct somatom definition flash (siemens
healthcare). the protocol used was as follows:
end inspiratory acquisition, 100–120 kv, 200–500
mas, 1–2.25 mm slice thickness, and 1–1.25 mm
slice interval. only one patient received 60 ml iv
of iodinated contrast material (iobitridol 350 [350
mg i/ml], xenetix, guerbet).

image analysis
two fellowship-trained thoracic radiologists,
with 5 and 11 years of experience, reviewed the
ct studies independently and resolved discrepancies by consensus. images were analyzed on
one of two pacs workstations: ids7 (sectra)
and centricity web (ge healthcare). the images
were viewed on both lung (width, 1500 hu; level,
−700 hu) and mediastinal (width, 350 hu; level,
40 hu) settings. the two readers analyzed the axial ct images but were free to evaluate the multiplanar reformats.

b

fig. 1—27-year-old man with middle east respiratory syndrome (case 1). patient
was smoker who was healthy otherwise. ct was performed 8 days after admission
and 20 days after onset of symptoms. patient was eventually discharged.
a, upper lung ct image shows bilateral subpleural ground-glass opacities
(arrows) and ill-defined centrilobular ground-glass nodules (arrowhead).
b and c, two lower lung ct images show large right lower lobe (arrow, b) and
small focal left lower lobe (arrow, c) subpleural consolidations.

783

downloaded from www.ajronline.org by purdue university library tss on 11/12/19 from ip address 128.211.185.213. copyright arrs. for personal use only; all rights reserved

the ct scans were assessed for the presence
of ground-glass opacities, consolidation, cavitation, centrilobular nodules, tree-in-bud pattern,
septal thickening, perilobular opacities, reticulation, architectural distortion, subpleural bands,
traction bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening, intrathoracic lymph node enlargement, and
pleural effusions. ground-glass opacity was defined as increased lung density with no obscuration of the underlying lung markings. consolidation was defined as increased lung density with
obscuration of the underlying lung markings.
perilobular opacities were defined as polygonal or curvilinear bands bordering the secondary pulmonary lobule. reticulation was defined
as interlobular or intralobular irregular septal
thickening. subpleural bands were defined as
thin linear opacities peripheral and parallel to
the pleura. traction bronchiectasis was defined
as irregular or distorted dilated airways seen in
areas of fibrosis.
the abnormalities were characterized as unilateral or bilateral. the distribution was categorized as focal, multifocal, or diffuse. focal was

fig. 2—19-year-old
ajlan
man with middle east
respiratory syndrome
(case 2). ct was
performed on day of
admission, which was
4 days from onset of
symptoms. patient was
eventually discharged.
chest ct image shows
isolated focal subpleural
left lower lobe
consolidation (arrow).

defined as a single focus of abnormality, multifocal as more than one focus, and diffuse as involvement of most of the volume of one lung.
the craniocaudal distribution of the abnormalities was categorized as upper lung predominant,

a

c
784

et al.

lower lung predominant, or no craniocaudal predilection. the transverse distribution of the abnormalities was categorized as central (i.e., peribronchovascular), peripheral (i.e., subpleural), or no
transverse predilection.

b

fig. 3—50-year-old woman with middle east respiratory syndrome (case 3).
patient had history of diabetes, hypertension, and chemotherapy-induced
cardiomyopathy. ct was performed 19 days after admission and 22 days after
onset of symptoms. patient was eventually discharged.
a, upper lung ct image shows minimal reticulation (arrow) and large areas of
bilateral ground-glass opacities and consolidation.
b, mid-lung ct image shows minimal reticulation (arrow), perilobular opacities
(arrowhead), and extensive ground-glass opacities and consolidation.
c, lower lung ct image shows traction bronchiectasis (arrow) and large areas of
bilateral ground-glass opacities and consolidation.

ajr:203, october 2014

ct in mers-cov infection

downloaded from www.ajronline.org by purdue university library tss on 11/12/19 from ip address 128.211.185.213. copyright arrs. for personal use only; all rights reserved

table 1: summary of clinical and ct features in seven patients with middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus
patient age
no.
(y) sex habits and comorbidities

main
symptoms

time from
onset to
ct (d)

main ct
findings

distribution of
ct findings

clinical
outcome

1

27

m

smoking,
no comorbidities

myalgia, lethargy,
back pain,
abdominal pain,
fever, cough

20

ggo more than consolidation,
bronchial wall thickening,
ill-defined centrilobular
opacities, septal thickening,
pleural effusions

bilateral, peribroncho­vascular, recovered
predominantly subpleural and
basilar

2

19

m

none

fever, cough

4

consolidation

unilateral, subpleural,
focal to left lower lobe

recovered

3

50

f

diabetes mellitus,
fever, cough,
hypertension,
dyspnea, sputum
chemotherapy-induced production
cardio­myopathy,
treated lymphoma

22

ggo more than consolidation,
bilateral, diffuse with no
perilobular opacities, septal
specific predominance
thickening, reticulation, traction
bronchiectasis

recovered

4

44

m

none

9

ggo more than consolidation,
septal thickening, pleural
effusions

bilateral, peribroncho­vascular, died
predominantly subpleural and
basilar

5

73

m

smoking, diabetes
cough, sputum
mellitus, hypertension,
production,
dyslipidemia
dyspnea

4

consolidation more than ggo

bilateral, peribroncho­vascular, died
predominantly subpleural and
basilar

6

53

f

obesity, prior resection
of parotid adenoid
cystic carcinoma

fever, cough,
sputum production

49

ggo, subpleural bands,
architectural distortion

bilateral, diffuse with no
specific predominance

7

83

m

diabetes mellitus,
hypertension

fever, cough,
dyspnea

9

ggo more than consolidation,
pleural effusions

bilateral, peribroncho­vascular, died
predominantly subpleural and
basilar

fever, cough,
dyspnea

recovered

note—ggo= ground-glass opacities.

results
subjects
our group of patients consisted of seven patients, five men and two women, with an age
range of 19–83 years (median age, 50 years).
the time from the onset of symptoms to hospital presentation ranged from 2 to 14 days
(median, 7 days). the main presenting symptoms were cough (n = 7), fever (n = 6), dyspnea
(n = 4), sputum production (n = 3), abdominal
pain (n = 1), back pain (n = 1), lethargy (n = 1),
and myalgia (n = 1). in one patient, lethargy
and myalgia preceded the respiratory symptoms by 3 days. the remaining six patients
had respiratory symptoms from the onset of
the infection. only one patient had a history
of contact with camels. another patient was a
physician who worked in a hospital where several proven mers cases were being treated.
the remaining five patients had no history of
contact with proven mers-cov cases or animals. two of the seven patients were smokers.
three of the seven patients had no significant
medical history. the remaining four patients
had one or more of the following comorbidities: hypertension (n = 3), diabetes (n = 3),
dyslipidemia (n = 1), obesity (n = 1), and chemotherapy-induced cardiomyopathy (n = 1).

ajr:203, october 2014

additionally, one patient had been treated for
lymphoma and another patient had undergone
resection of parotid adenoid cystic carcinoma.
nasopharyngeal swab testing yielded a diagnosis of mers-cov in six of the seven patients. one of the seven patients had a falsenegative swab result. bronchoalveolar lavage
(bal) was performed in five of the seven patients, with all bal samples testing positive
for mers-cov. all seven patients had lymphopenia (absolute lymphocyte count < 1.5 ×
103/ul) on presentation or during hospitalization. three patients had leukopenia (absolute
white blood count, < 4.5 × 103/ul), and three
patients had thrombocytopenia (absolute
platelet count < 150 × 103/ul) on presentation
or during hospitalization. the creatinine was
normal on admission and became elevated
(levels > 115 umol/l) during hospitalization
in all seven patients. serum ldh values were
available and elevated in three of the seven patients (levels exceeding 190 u/l). ast values
were elevated in all seven patients (levels > 37
u/l). alt values were available and normal
in six of the seven patients. creatine kinase
values were available and elevated in three of
the seven patients (levels > 232 iu/l). blood
and sputum cultures revealed no superadded

organisms in all seven patients during the entire course of hospitalization.
all patients were transferred to the icu
from the emergency department and were
placed in airborne infection isolation rooms.
all seven patients were started on oseltamivir (tamiflu, roche laboratories) and various broad-spectrum antibiotics on admission
or during hospitalization. one of the seven
patients received empirical low-dose steroids during the icu stay. four of the seven
patients survived the icu stay, were transferred to the medical floor, and were eventually discharged. the duration of hospitalization ranged from 15 to 58 days (median
duration, 31 days).
image analysis
one of the seven patients underwent ct
on the day of admission. the remaining six
patients underwent ct 1–35 days after admission (median, 11 days). the time from
symptom onset to performing the ct ranged
from 4 to 49 days (median, 17 days). no ct
examinations were repeated during hospitalization or after discharge from the hospital.
airspace opacities were more common
than interstitial changes on the ct studies of

785

downloaded from www.ajronline.org by purdue university library tss on 11/12/19 from ip address 128.211.185.213. copyright arrs. for personal use only; all rights reserved

ajlan et al.

a

b
fig. 4—44-year-old man with middle east respiratory syndrome (case 4). patient
had no prior health problems. ct was performed 1 day after admission, which was
9 days after onset of symptoms. patient died in icu.
a, upper lung ct image shows large areas of bilateral subpleural ground-glass
opacities (arrows).
b, mid-lung ct image shows that ground-glass opacities have
peribronchovascular distribution as well (arrow).
c, lower lung ct image shows more extensive and confluent basal abnormalities,
with right lower lobe consolidation (arrow) and bilateral smooth interlobular septal
thickening (arrowheads).

c
our seven patients (table 1). five of the seven
patients had both ground-glass opacities and
consolidation (fig. 1). in those five patients,
ground-glass opacities were more extensive
than consolidation, with the exception of one
patient. one of the seven patients had isolated ground-glass opacities and another had
isolated consolidation (fig. 2). in a patient
with isolated ground-glass opacities, ct was
performed 49 days after the onset of symptoms, and minimal subpleural bands and architectural distortion were present. smooth
septal thickening was identified in three of
the seven patients. minimal peripheral reticulation, traction bronchiectasis, and perilobular opacities were noted in only one patient,
who underwent ct 22 days after the onset
of symptoms (fig. 3). only one patient had
both mild bronchial wall thickening and illdefined centrilobular ground-glass nodules,
suggestive of small airways involvement.
small bilateral pleural effusions were present in three of the seven patients. none of the
patients had tree-in-bud pattern, cavitation,
or intrathoracic lymph node enlargement.
the abnormalities were bilateral in six and
unilateral in one of seven patients. the patient

786

with unilateral involvement had a single focal
consolidation in the left lower lobe. both subpleural and lower lung–predominant airspace
involvement were identified in five of the seven patients. in the remaining two patients,
the abnormalities were extensive and diffuse,
with no clear craniocaudal or transverse predominance. in four of five patients with subpleural predominant airspace involvement,
variable degrees of peribronchovascular airspace involvement were also present (fig. 4).
discussion
this study shows that airspace opacities on
ct are common in patients hospitalized with
mers-cov infection. in most of our patients,
ground-glass opacities were more extensive
than consolidation. however, one patient had
more pronounced consolidation and another
had an isolated focal consolidation in the left
lower lobe. another observation is that a few
patients may show septal thickening and pleural effusions. importantly, tree-in-bud pattern, cavitation, and lymph node enlargement
were not seen in our cohort.
the presence of variable degrees of lung
opacities in mers has been described in a few

studies, without clearly addressing the exact
distribution [2, 12]. because our study evaluated the ct findings in this laboratory-confirmed
group of mers patients, we had the ability to
better characterize the nature and distribution
of the abnormalities. the predominance of airspace opacities in the subpleural and basilar
lung regions is a noteworthy finding. additionally, a few patients showed peribronchovascular involvement as well. airspace opacities in
such a distribution have been described as suggestive of an organizing pneumonia pattern
[15, 16]. this pattern is reminiscent of what
has been described in cases of h1n1 influenza a virus (formerly known as swine-origin
influenza virus) infection, in which an imaging picture of organizing pneumonia developed in acutely sick patients [17, 18]. although
the presence of organizing pneumonia in cases of h1n1 influenza a infection was initially described in the radiology literature [17, 18],
subsequent histopathology studies confirmed
this pattern on evaluated lung specimens [19,
20]. it is early at this stage to reach any solid
conclusions, but our understanding of merscov may undergo the same evolution as that of
h1n1 influenza a virus.

ajr:203, october 2014

downloaded from www.ajronline.org by purdue university library tss on 11/12/19 from ip address 128.211.185.213. copyright arrs. for personal use only; all rights reserved

ct in mers-cov infection
in the two patients in whom the time from
the onset of symptoms to performing ct was
the longest (22 and 49 days), reticulation and
traction bronchiectasis were seen in one patient, whereas subpleural bands and architectural distortion were seen in the other.
organizing pneumonia, a nonspecific inflammatory lung response to insults, is known to
progress to a fibrotic process in some patients
on longer-term follow-up [21]. fibrotic changes after organizing pneumonia may have occurred in those two patients, but the lack of
ct early in the course of the disease is a limitation to this assumption.
the who recommends various droplet,
airborne, and contact precautions when dealing with suspected cases of mers-cov infection [4]. however, for several reasons, timely
identification of mers patients is not always
straightforward. first, patients may present
with mild or unusual symptoms [2, 4, 12]. second, apparently healthy patients could carry
mers-cov that may be unrecognized [22].
third, rrt-pcr testing of initial respiratory samples may yield false-negative results
[12]. fourth, even in patients correctly identified with mers-cov, the result of rrt-pcr
may take 24–48 hours to be processed. thus, in
patients with acute respiratory symptoms who are
living in or traveling from areas of the mers-cov
outbreak, familiarity with suggestive imaging findings may help with early isolation
and management.
we acknowledge that the retrospective design and small number of patients limit our
study. with this in mind, it would be difficult
to reach generalized conclusions regarding how
ct findings would correlate with clinical outcomes. additionally, the time from symptom
onset to performing the ct examination was
variable, which limited our ability to ascertain the relationship between symptom duration and lung imaging findings. we suggest that
mers-cov induces an organizing pneumonia lung reaction, but we had no histopathologic lung specimen correlation to solidify this observation.
in summary, the most common ct finding in hospitalized patients with mers-cov
infection is that of bilateral, predominantly subpleural and basilar airspace changes,
with more extensive ground-glass opacities

ajr:203, october 2014

than consolidation. the predilection of the
abnormalities to the subpleural and peri­
broncho­vascular regions is suggestive of an
organizing pneumonia pattern. recognizing
this pattern in acutely ill patients living in or
traveling from endemic areas may help in the
early diagnosis of mers-cov infection.
references
1. zaki am, van boheemen s, bestebroer tm, osterhaus ad, fouchier ra. isolation of a novel
coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in saudi
arabia. n engl j med 2012; 367:1814–1820
2. assiri a, al-tawfiq ja, al-rabeeah aa, et al. epidemiological, demographic, and clinical characteristics of 47 cases of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus disease from saudi arabia: a
descriptive study. lancet inf dis 2013; 13:752–761
3. world health organization website. middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) summary and literature update—as of 27 march 2014.
www.who.int/csr/disease/coronavirus_infections/
mers_cov_update_27_march_2014.pdf?ua=1.
accessed april 17, 2014
4. world health organization website. global alert
and response: middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (mers-cov)—april 14, 2014 update.
www.who.int/csr/don/2014_04_14_mers/en/index.
html. accessed april 17, 2014
5. world health organization website. middle east
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov)
summary and literature update—as of 9 may 2014.
www.who.int/csr/disease/coronavirus_infections/
mers_cov_update_27_march_2014.pdf?ua=1.
accessed may 13, 2014
6. memish za, zumla ai, al-hakeem rf, al-rabeeah aa, stephens gm. family cluster of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus infections. n engl j med 2013; 368:2487–2494
7. assiri a, mcgeer a, perl tm, et al. hospital outbreak of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus. n engl j med 2013; 369:407–416
8. memish za, cotten m, meyer b, et al. human
infection with mers coronavirus after exposure
to infected camels, saudi arabia, 2013. emerg
infect dis 2014; 20:1012–1015
9. alagaili an, briese t, mishra n, et al. middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection
in dromedary camels in saudi arabia. mbio 2014;
5:e00884-14
10. memish za, mishra n, olival kj, et al. middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus in bats,

saudi arabia. emerg infect dis 2013; 19:1819–1823
11. abdel-moneim as. middle east respiratory syndrome coronazvirus (mers-cov): evidence and
speculations. arch virol [epub 2014 feb 11]
12. arabi ym, arifi aa, balkhy hh, et al. clinical
course and outcomes of critically ill patients with
middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus
infection. ann intern med 2014; 160:389–397
13. corman vm, eckerle i, bleicker t, et al. detection of a novel human coronavirus by real-time
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction.
euro surveill 2012; 17:20285
14. corman vm, müller ma, costabel u, et al. assays for laboratory confirmation of novel human
coronavirus (hcov-emc) infections. euro surveill 2012; 17:20334
15. ujita m, renzoni ea, veeraraghavan s, wells
au, hansell dm. organizing pneumonia: peri­
lobular pattern at thin-section ct. radiology
2004; 232:757–761
16. travis wd, costabel u, hansell dm, et al. an official american thoracic society/european
respiratory society statement: update of the international multidisciplinary classification of the
idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. am j respir
crit care med 2013; 188:733–748
17. ajlan am, quiney b, nicolaou s, müller nl. swineorigin influenza a (h1n1) viral infection: radiographic and ct findings. ajr 2009; 193:1494–1499
18. ajlan am, khashoggi k, nicolaou s, müller nl.
ct utilization in the prospective diagnosis of a
case of swine-origin influenza a (h1n1) viral infection. j radiol case rep. 2010; 4:24–30
19. gill jr, sheng zm, ely sf, et al. pulmonary pathologic findings of fatal 2009 pandemic influenza
a/h1n1 viral infections. arch pathol lab med
2010; 134:235–243
20. marchiori e, zanetti g, fontes c, santos m, influenza a (h1n1) virus-associated pneumonia: highresolution computed tomography—pathologic
correlation. eur j radiol 2011; 80:e500–e504
21. kligerman sj, franks tj, galvin jr. from the
radiologic pathology archives: organization and
fibrosis as a response to lung injury in diffuse alveolar damage, organizing pneumonia, and acute
fibrinous and organizing pneumonia. radiographics 2013; 33:1951–1975
22. world health organization website. global alert
and response: middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (mers-cov)—june 26, 2013 update.
www.who.int/csr/don/2013_06_26/en/index.html.
accessed april 17, 2014

787

