original article
middle eastern respiratory syndrome corona
virus (mers cov): case reports from a tertiary
care hospital in saudi arabia
mohammad khalid, basha khan, fahad al rabiah, ruwaida alismaili, sarfraz saleemi, agha
muhammad rehan-khaliq, ihab weheba, hail al abdely, magid halim, quaid johar nadri, abdullah
mohsin al dalaan, mohamed zeitouni, taimur butt, eid al mutairy
from the department of medicine, king faisal specialist hospital & research center, riyadh, saudi arabia
correspondence: dr. mohammad khalid · department of medicine, king faisal specialist hospital & research center po box 3354 riyadh
11211 saudi arabia · mkhalid@kfshrc.edu.sa
ann saudi med 2014; 34(5): 396-400
doi: 10.5144/0256-4947.2014.396

background and objectives: middle eastern respiratory syndrome caused by novel coronavirus (mers
cov) has been a major public health challenge since it was first described in 2012 in saudi arabia. so far, there
is no effective treatment for this serious illness, which features a high mortality rate. we report an initial experience of the use of ribavirin and interferon (ifn)-a2b in the management of mers cov at a tertiary care hospital.
design and settings: a case series of 6 patients admitted with a confirmed diagnosis of mers cov were
treated with ribavirin and ifn-a2b in addition to supportive management. the patients’ demographics, clinical
parameters, and outcomes were recorded. fifty-four close contacts of these patients were screened for mers
cov.
methods: six patients with mers cov infection were included in this study. four cases featured symptomatic
disease, including pneumonia and respiratory failure, while 2 were asymptomatic close contacts of the mers
cov patients. the mers cov infection was confirmed by reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction detection of the consensus viral rna targets upstream of the e gene (upe) and open reading frame (orf1b) on a
sputum sample. the patients’ demographics, comorbid conditions, time to diagnosis and initiation of treatment,
and clinical outcomes were recorded.
results: three out of 6 patients who had comorbid conditions died during the study period, while 3 had successful outcomes. the diagnosis and treatment was delayed by an average of 15 days in those patients who died.
only 2 close contacts out of the 54 screened (3.7%) were positive for mers cov.
conclusion: treatment with ribavirin and ifn-a2b may be effective in patients infected with mers cov.
there appears to be a low infectivity rate among close contacts of mers cov patients.

s

ince it was first isolated in 2012 from a patient
suffering from pneumonia,1 the middle eastern
respiratory syndrome caused by novel coronavirus (mers cov) infection incidence significantly
increased in saudi arabia until recently, when only
occasional cases have been reported. as of december
11, 2014, the total number of cases reported in saudi
arabia was 819, of which 352 patients passed away.2
the latest guidelines issued by the ministry of
health of saudi arabia in may 2014 recommend
screening patients for mers in the following patient
categories:3

396

1. a person with fever and community-acquired
pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome
based on clinical or radiological evidence.
2. a hospitalized patient with health care-associated
pneumonia based on clinical and radiological evidence.
3. a person with (1) acute febrile (≥38°c) illness
(2) body aches, headache, diarrhea, or nausea/
vomiting, with or without respiratory symptoms
and (3) unexplained leucopenia (white blood cell
count [wbc] <3.5×109/l) and thrombocytopenia (platelets <150×109/l).

ann saudi med 2014

september-october

www.annsaudimed.net

original article

mers-cov in saudi arabia

4. a
 person (including health care workers) who had
protected or unprotected exposure to a confirmed
or probable case of mers cov infection and
who presented with upper or lower respiratory
illness within 2 weeks after exposure.
although saudi arabia is a hub for the makkah
and madinah cities, which are visited by millions of
pilgrims from around the world, studies do not show
increased patient numbers, indicating a low infection
rate. the reported mortality rate is around 30% to
40%.4 there are already reports on the spread of mers
cov in europe and north america.5 no definite data
exist regarding its mode of transmission. multiple zoonotic transmissions from animal reservoirs leading to
human infection have been suggested; in particular, the
camel as a reservoir for the virus has been postulated.6-8
isolation and sequencing of mers cov obtained from
a dromedary camel and from a patient who died of
laboratory-confirmed mers cov infection after close
contact with camels have been reported.9 there are
no guidelines on the treatment of mers cov infection. animal data suggest that the treatment of mers
cov-infected rhesus macaques with interferon-a2b
and ribavirin reduces virus replication, moderates the
host response, and improves clinical outcomes.10 a case
series of 5 critically ill patients with a late diagnosis of
mers cov infection who were treated with ifn-a2b
and ribavirin did not show any benefit.11 omrani et al12
reported that treatment with ribavirin and pegylated
ifn-a2a significantly improves survival 14 days after the diagnosis of mers cov infection (p=.004).
enhanced survival 28 days after diagnosis in patients
who received ribavirin and pegylated ifn-a2a was not
statistically significant (p=.054).12
the king faisal specialist hospital and research
center is the major tertiary care institute in the country. we report a single-institute experience of patients
with mers cov infection, its outcomes in infected
individuals, the treatment response to ribavirin and
ifn-a2b, and its potential transmission to immediate
contacts.

methods
six patients with mers cov infection were included in the study. four cases with symptomatic disease,
pneumonia, and respiratory failure, and 2 asymptomatic cases who were close contacts of the mers cov
patients were included. the mers cov infection
was confirmed by reverse transcription–polymerase
chain reaction (rt-pcr) detection of the consensus
viral rna targets upstream of the e gene (upe) and
open reading frame (orf1b) on a sputum sample. the

ann saudi med 2014 september-october

www.annsaudimed.net

workup for mycoplasma, legionella, bacterial infection,
and other viruses in the 4 active cases and 2 asymptomatic cases were negative.
patients were given ribavirin and ifn-a2b according to the dosage recommended in table 1.
hemogram, electrolytes, renal function, and liver enzyme levels were normal upon initial presentation for
all 6 cases (table 2).
case 2 had a large family of 22 individuals who were
all screened. one contact was positive upon screening
with an asymptomatic presentation (case 6) and a normal chest x-ray, but the computed tomography (ct)
scan of the chest showed a left lower lobe solitary infiltrate (figure 3). for case 4 (table 2), 3 children had
tested negative for mers cov, but the spouse (case 5)
developed upper respiratory tract symptoms and lung
infiltrates, as observed on chest x-ray. she was negative
for mers cov infection, but in view of her symptoms
and close contact with the patient, she was labeled as
a presumptive case of mers cov infection. twentyeight health care workers who came in close contact
with infected individuals were screened, and none of
them were positive for mers cov infection. an antibody assay for cov was not available in saudi arabia
at the time of the study; seroconversion in active cases
and among close contacts could thus not be identified.

results
four cases with active infection developed extensive
bilateral lung infiltrates and respiratory failure (figure
1). three patients required ventilatory support, vasopressors, and renal replacement therapy. all 3 patients
requiring ventilator support expired due to multiorgan
failure. the diagnosis of mers cov and treatment
with ribavirin and ifn-a2b was delayed in these patients by an average of 14.7 days. case 4, who tested
positive for mers cov (and who survived), had bilateral lung infiltrates on chest x-ray with respiratory
failure requiring noninvasive ventilator support. this
patient was started on ribavirin and ifn-a2b, along
with broad-spectrum antibiotics and methylprednisolone pulse therapy on the day of admission. he recovered without developing other organ system failures or
hemodynamic compromise, and was discharged from
the hospital in stable condition. case 5, who was a close
contact of case 4, was empirically started on ribavirin
and ifn-a2b after developing symptoms (figure 2).
she recovered with complete resolution of the lung infiltrate.
case 6 was a close contact of case 2, who tested positive for mers cov. he was asymptomatic, but showed
a solitary infiltrate on ct scan of the chest (figure

397

original article

mers-cov in saudi arabia

table 1. suggested treatment protocol for ribavirin and interferon-a2b therapy.
agent

dosing regimen based on crcl

ribavirin (oral)

crcl >50 ml/min

crcl 20-50 ml/min

crcl <20 ml/min or on dialysis

2000 mg loading dose followed by
1200 mg every 8 h for 4 d, then 600
mg every 8 h for 4-6 d

2000 mg loading dose followed by
1200 mg every 8 h for 4 d, then 600
mg every 6 h for 4-6 d

2000 mg loading dose followed by
200 mg every 6 h for 4 d,
then 200 mg every 12 h
for 4-6 d

interferon-a2b

180 μg subcutaneously once per wk for 2 wk

note: all dosing recommendations were adopted from hisham momattin et al.15 abbreviation: crcl: creatinine clearance.

table 2. six cases with mers cov infection and treatment response to ribavirin and interferon-α2b.
patient
(case
number)

age
(y)

sex

comorbid
conditions

time to
diagnosis
(d)

time to
treatment
(d)

renal failure

hemodynamic
instability

outcome

1

74

m

ischemic heart
disease heart
failure

18

19

+

+

expired

2

84

m

right bundle
branch block

12

12

+

+

expired

3

76

m

cardiomyopathy
heart failure

14

15

+

+

expired

4

54

m

none

2

2

–

–

survived

5

48

f

none

1

1

–

–

survived

6

17

m

none

1

2

–

–

survived

abbreviations: mers cov: middle eastern respiratory syndrome coronavirus; m: male; f: female.

3). he was given empirical therapy with ribavirin and
ifn-a2b. the patient remained asymptomatic, and
a follow-up ct scan of the chest (figure 3) was performed after 2 weeks, showing almost complete resolution of the lung infiltrate.
twenty-six family members of active mers cov
cases and 28 health care workers who came in close
contact with the active cases were screened for mers
cov. only 2 out of 54 persons screened (3.7%) were
positive for mers cov. none of the positive contacts
were health care workers.

discussion

figure 1. chest x-ray of a patient showing bilateral lung infiltrates.

398

since it was first reported in 2012, mers cov is
emerging as a serious endemic illness associated with
high mortality. saudi arabia is the most affected country, featuring the majority of reported cases; it has an
overall case fatality rate in saudi arabia of up to 30%
to 40%.
as in the case of sars (severe acute respiratory
syndrome), the spread of mers cov to other parts of
the world is expected as a consequence of the increase
in international travel. there is also the concern that the
yearly hajj (pilgrimage) season, which is represented by

ann saudi med 2014

september-october

www.annsaudimed.net

original article

mers-cov in saudi arabia

almost every country around the world, may accelerate
this spread,7 although no data suggest such an occurrence. several other countries, including the united
states of america, have reported mers cov cases.
most of these cases are travel-related and have originated from middle eastern countries.
the early diagnosis and screening of mers cov
is difficult due to the lack of comprehensive and clear
guidelines, as well as the lack of available screening tests
in many health care facilities. data on treatment with
antiviral therapy is not definite.
guery and van der werf13 highlighted the need for
therapeutic protocols for mers cov. ribavirin and
ifn-a2b were used during the sars epidemic of
2003. because of the similarities between the 2 covs,
treatment with ribavirin and ifn-a2b has been suggested as a potential therapy for mers cov. recently
published data in animal models show that mers
cov is sensitive to ribavirin and ifn-a2b combination
therapy.14 both drugs were able to kill the virus at high
doses individually, whereas a combination of ribavirin
and ifn-a2b had a synergistic killing effect at much
lower doses with possible lower toxicity. the animal
studies have also shown some prophylactic effects in
reducing the severity of the disease in animals.
in this series of 6 cases, fatal cases were of older ages
and had comorbid conditions (cases 1, 2, and 3; table
1), and they developed rapidly progressive respiratory
and multisystem organ failure, as well as hemodynamic
instability. there was a delay in the diagnosis, and the
initiation of treatment with ribavirin and ifn-a2b indicated the possibility that the early initiation of therapy might be helpful in patients with mers cov infection.11 this hypothesis is supported by the fact that
3 other patients – 1 symptomatic and 2 asymptomatic
patients with radiological changes who received treatment at the beginning of the illness – recovered completely. none of the patients treated with ribavirin and
ifn-a2b developed any side effects or complications.
since only 2 people among the 54 close contacts acquired the infection, the findings suggest that humanto-human transmission is low. since mers cov was
first reported, there has not been an extensive spread
of the infection, as is usually the case for influenza outbreaks. an extensive public awareness campaign may
have played a role in containing the spread of infection.
this small case series suggests a possible role of ribavirin and ifn-a2b in the treatment of human mers

ann saudi med 2014 september-october

www.annsaudimed.net

figure 2. chest x-ray showing upper respiratory tract infection
and lung infiltrates.

figure 3. chest x-ray showing almost complete resolution of the lung infiltrate.

cov infection, if started early in the illness. delay in
treatment, older age groups, and pre-existing comorbid conditions are predictors of poor outcomes. the
transmission rate of the infection among close contacts
was low in this series. because of their limitations,
case series (such as this one) provide insufficient evidence to make any recommendations regarding therapy.
however, with the known high mortality rate associated with mers cov infection, there is an urgent need
to initiate controlled trials to analyze the safety and effectiveness of the primary and prophylactic treatment
of mers cov.

399

original article

mers-cov in saudi arabia

references
1. zaki am, van boheemen s, bestebroer tm,
osterhaus ad, fouchier ra. isolation of a novel
coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in saudi
arabia. n engl j med. 2012;367(19):1814–1820.
2. ministry of health [webpage on the internet].
statistics and daily reports. kingdom of saudi arabia: ministry of health; 2014. available from: http://
www.moh.gov.sa/en/ccc/pressreleases/pages/
default.aspx. accessed july 15, 2014.
3. ministry of health. case definition and surveillance guidance for mers-cov testing in saudi
arabia. saudi arabia: ministry of health; 2014.
available from. http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/documents/mohcasedefinitionmerscovversionmay132014.pdf. accessed may 13, 2014.
4. falzarano d, de wit e, martellaro c, et al. inhibition of novel ? coronavirus replication by a combination of interferon-a2b and ribavirin. sci rep
2013; 3:1686.
5. khan k, sears j, hu vw, et al. potential for the
international spread of middle east respiratory
syndrome in association with mass gatherings in
saudi arabia. plos curr. 2013;5.

400

6. alagaili an, briese t, mishra n, et al. middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection in dromedary camels in saudi arabia. mbio.
2014;5(2):e00884–14.
7. saey th. camels implicated as possible hosts of
mers virus. science news. online available from
https://www.sciencenews.org/article/camelsimplicated-possible-hosts-mers-virus. accessed
august 8, 2013.
8. briese t, mishra n, jain k, et al. 2014. middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus quasispecies that include homologues of human isolates
revealed through whole-genome analysis and
virus cultured from dromedary camels in saudi
arabia. mbio. 2014;5(3):e01146–14.
9. azhar ei, el-kafrawy sa, farraj sa, et al.
evidence for camel-to-human transmission of
mers coronavirus. n engl j med. 2014;370(26):
2499–2505.
10. falzarano d, de wit e, rasmussen al, et al.
treatment with interferon-?2b and ribavirin improves outcome in mers-cov-infected rhesus
macaques. nat med. 2013;19(10):1313–1317.

11. al-tawfiq ja, momattin h, dib j, memish za.
ribavirin and interferon therapy in patients infected with the middle east respiratory syndrome
coronavirus: an observational study. int j infect
dis. 2014;20:42–46.
12. omrani as, saad mm, baig k, et al. ribavirin and interferon alfa-2a for severe middle east
respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection: a
retrospective cohort study. lancet infect dis.
2014;14(11):1090–1095.
13. guery b, van der werf s. coronavirus: need
for a therapeutic approach. lancet infect dis.
2013;13(9):726–727.
14. falzarano d, de wit e, martellaro c, callison
j, munster vj, feldmann h. inhibition of novel ?
coronavirus replication by a combination of interferon-?2b and ribavirin. sci rep. 2013;3:1686.
15. momattin h, mohammed k, zumla a, memish za, al-tawfiq ja. therapeutic options for
middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(mers-cov)--possible lessons from a systematic review of sars-cov therapy. int j infect dis.
2013;17(10):e792–e798.

ann saudi med 2014

september-october

www.annsaudimed.net

