middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (merscov) causes transient lower respiratory tract infection
in rhesus macaques
emmie de wita, angela l. rasmussenb, darryl falzaranoa, trenton bushmakera, friederike feldmannc,
douglas l. briningc, elizabeth r. fischerd, cynthia martellaroa, atsushi okumurab, jean changb, dana scottc,
arndt g. beneckeb,e, michael g. katzeb, heinz feldmanna,f,1, and vincent j. munstera,1
a
laboratory of virology, crocky mountain veterinary branch, and dmicroscopy unit, research technologies branch, division of intramural research, national
institute of allergy and infectious diseases, national institutes of health, hamilton, mt 59840; bdepartment of microbiology, university of washington,
seattle, wa 98195; edepartment of biology, université pierre et marie curie, centre national de la recherche scientiﬁc, unité mixte de recherche 7224,
75005 paris, france; and fdepartment of medical microbiology, university of manitoba, winnipeg, mb, canada r3e 0j9

edited* by tilahun d. yilma, university of california, davis, ca, and approved august 26, 2013 (received for review june 6, 2013)

in 2012, a novel betacoronavirus, designated middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus or mers-cov and associated with
severe respiratory disease in humans, emerged in the arabian
peninsula. to date, 108 human cases have been reported, including
cases of human-to-human transmission. the availability of an
animal disease model is essential for understanding pathogenesis
and developing effective countermeasures. upon a combination of
intratracheal, ocular, oral, and intranasal inoculation with 7 × 106
50% tissue culture infectious dose of the mers-cov isolate hcovemc/2012, rhesus macaques developed a transient lower respiratory tract infection. clinical signs, virus shedding, virus replication
in respiratory tissues, gene expression, and cytokine and chemokine proﬁles peaked early in infection and decreased over time.
mers-cov caused a multifocal, mild to marked interstitial pneumonia, with virus replication occurring mainly in alveolar pneumocytes. this tropism of mers-cov for the lower respiratory tract
may explain the severity of the disease observed in humans and
the, up to now, limited human-to-human transmission.
emerging infectious disease

| dpp4

downloaded at purdue university library on november 12, 2019

i

n june of 2012, a novel betacoronavirus, associated with severe
respiratory disease in humans emerged in the middle east (1,
2), which is closely related to betacoronaviruses circulating in
bats (3, 4). the ﬁrst isolate of middle east respiratory coronavirus (mers-cov) (5), hcov-emc/2012, was obtained from
a patient with a fatal pneumonia and acute renal failure. to date,
107 additional human cases have been identiﬁed, of which 49
were fatal (6). aside from cases in saudi arabia, qatar, jordan,
and the united arab emirates, imported cases have been identiﬁed in the united kingdom, germany, france, tunisia, and
italy (6). although no information is available on the source or
route of primary transmission of mers-cov, human-to-human
transmission has been recorded (7–9). clinical data on human
cases of mers-cov infection are currently sparse, but it
appears that this virus mainly causes severe lower respiratory
tract disease, occasionally accompanied by renal disease. the
severity of disease distinguishes mers-cov from other coronaviruses circulating in the human population, hcov-229e,
hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, and hcov-hku1, which are generally associated with upper respiratory tract infections. instead,
mers-cov appears to be more similar to the severe respiratory
disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)cov.
in vitro studies have shown that mers-cov replicates efﬁciently in nonciliated cells in the primary human airway epithelium (10), and in ex vivo human lung cultures mers-cov
replicated in bronchial, bronchiolar, and alveolar epithelial cells
(11), in line with the observed respiratory disease in humans. the
recently deﬁned receptor for mers-cov, dipeptidylpeptidase 4

16598–16603 | pnas | october 8, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 41

(dpp4), is generally expressed in endothelial and epithelial cells
and has been shown to be present on cultured human nonciliated
bronchiolar epithelium cells (12), providing further information
on the respiratory tropism of mers-cov.
animal models that recapitulate human disease are essential
for understanding pathologic processes involved in disease progression. moreover, these models are instrumental for the development of prophylactic and therapeutic countermeasures. we
have previously shown that rhesus macaques inoculated with
a high dose of mers-cov isolate hcov-emc/2012 developed
a respiratory disease reminiscent of that observed in humans
(13). to increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of
mers-cov in the absence of clinical and pathological data
from human patients, we present herein a more detailed analysis
of the extent of virus replication, the histopathological changes
in the respiratory tract and changes in systemic (peripheral blood
mononuclear cell, pbmc) and local (lung tissue) gene expression of mers-cov–infected rhesus macaques.
results
clinical signs and hematological changes in animals inoculated with
mers-cov. six rhesus macaques were inoculated with 7 × 106

signiﬁcance
the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov)
is the latest emerged coronavirus causing severe respiratory
disease with a high case fatality rate in humans. to better
understand the disease caused by mers-cov, we developed
a rhesus macaque model. infection of rhesus macaques with
mers-cov resulted in the rapid development of a transient
pneumonia, with mers-cov replication largely restricted to the
lower respiratory tract. this afﬁnity of mers-cov for the lungs
partly explains the severity of the disease observed in humans.
the mers-cov rhesus macaque model will be instrumental in
developing and testing vaccine and treatment options for an
emerging viral pathogen with pandemic potential.
author contributions: e.d.w., h.f., and v.j.m. designed research; e.d.w., a.l.r., d.f., t.b.,
f.f., d.l.b., e.r.f., c.m., a.o., j.c., d.s., h.f., and v.j.m. performed research; e.d.w., a.l.r.,
d.f., e.r.f., a.o., d.s., a.g.b., m.g.k., h.f., and v.j.m. analyzed data; and e.d.w., a.l.r.,
h.f., and v.j.m. wrote the paper.
the authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
*this direct submission article had a prearranged editor.
data deposition: the data reported in this paper have been deposited in the gene expression omnibus (geo) database, www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo (accession no. gse44542)
and are also available to the public at http://viromics.washington.edu.
1

to whom correspondence may be addressed. e-mail: feldmannh@niaid.nih.gov or
vincent.munster@nih.gov.

this article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1310744110/-/dcsupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1310744110

fig. 1. hematological changes in rhesus macaques inoculated with mers-cov. total number of white blood cells (left), neutrophils (center), and lymphocytes (right) were determined in blood samples obtained from animals 0, 1, 3, and 6 dpi. of note, cov-2, cov-4, and cov-6 were euthanized 3 dpi, and
thus no samples are available for 6 dpi. each line represents one animal: cov-1 (●), cov-2 (■), cov-3 (▲), cov-4 (▼), cov-5 (♦), cov-6 (○).

tcid50 (50% tissue culture infectious dose) of mers-cov
isolate hcov-emc/2012 (13). clinical signs upon inoculation
with hcov-emc/2012 were transient and varied between animals, as speciﬁed in table s1. analysis of blood samples collected 0, 1, 3, and 6 d postinfection (dpi) indicated increased
white blood cell counts in ﬁve of six animals on 1 dpi (fig. 1).
further analysis indicated that this was the result of an increase
in the number of neutrophils. moreover, there was a reduction in
the number of lymphocytes. by 3 dpi, blood cell counts had returned
to numbers comparable to those before inoculation (fig. 1).
viral rna in swabs and bronchoalveolar lavages. nasal, oropharyngeal, urogenital, and rectal swabs were obtained from the
animals 1, 3, and 6 dpi. on 1 and 3 dpi, nasal swabs from all
animals were positive for the presence of viral rna by quantitative rt-pcr (qrt-pcr); only one animal had a positive nasal
swab on day 6 postinfection (fig. 2a). oropharyngeal swabs
obtained from cov-3 on days 3 and 6 postinfection and obtained
from cov-6 on day 6 postinfection were positive. all urogenital
and rectal swabs were negative with the exception of a urogenital
swab collected from cov-2 on day 1 postinfection. bronchoalveolar
lavages (bal) were also performed 1, 3, and 6 dpi and analyzed
for the presence of viral rna. bal obtained 1 dpi were positive by qrt-pcr in ﬁve of six animals; 3 dpi three of six bals
were positive, and 6 dpi two of three bals contained viral
rna (fig. 2b).

pathology of mers-cov in the respiratory tract. upon necropsy of
animals 3 and 6 dpi, the areas of the individual lung lobes displaying lesions were scored. lung lobes revealed varying degrees
of gross lesions, ranging from 0 to 75% (fig. s2). histological
lesions in mers-cov–infected macaques were limited to the
lungs. on day 3 postinfection, lesions were characterized as
multifocal, mild (fig. 5a) to marked (fig. 5b) interstitial pneumonia. the pneumonia was characterized by thickening of alveolar septae by edema ﬂuid and ﬁbrin, and small to moderate
numbers of macrophages and fewer neutrophils. alveoli contained
moderate numbers of pulmonary macrophages and neutrophils;
many of these alveolar macrophages formed multinucleate
syncytia (fig. 5d). one animal euthanized 3 dpi also displayed lesions

we have previously reported the presence of viral rna and
infectious virus throughout the lungs of inoculated macaques,
with viral load decreasing between 3 and 6 dpi (13). in addition
to the different lung lobes, we have previously analyzed several
other tissues, including tissues of the upper respiratory tract,
lung lesions, and kidney (for complete list, see materials and
methods). although there was some variation between the
different macaques with regard to the presence of viral rna,
we could consistently detect the virus by qrt-pcr in the nasal
mucosa, trachea, and mediastinal lymph nodes on 3 dpi (fig. 3).
furthermore, we could detect viral rna in conjunctiva, tonsils,
oronasopharynx, and in the left and right bronchus. viral loads
were lower in these tissues by 6 dpi and viral rna could no
longer be detected in the nasal mucosa or conjunctiva at that
time (fig. 3). viral rna could not be detected in kidney or
bladder tissue samples.
to further prove that virus replication occurred in the lungs of
mers-cov–inoculated rhesus macaques, transmission electron
microscopy was performed on lung lesion samples collected 6
dpi. at this time point, coronavirus particles could be detected in
alveolar pneumocytes (fig. 4). moreover, qrt-pcr analysis of
rna extracted from the right lower lung lobe and lung lesions
obtained 3 and 6 dpi, indicated the transcription of subgenomic
mrna (orf5) as well as orf1 rna in samples collected from
all animals and at both time points (fig. s1), another indicator of
active virus replication in the lower respiratory tract.
de wit et al.

fig. 2. virus shedding in rhesus macaques inoculated with mers-cov. nasal
swabs (a) and bal ﬂuid (b) were collected 1, 3, and 6 dpi. of note, cov-2,
cov-4, and cov-6 were euthanized 3 dpi and thus no samples are available
for 6 dpi. rna was extracted and viral load was determined as tcid50
equivalents by qrt-pcr. tcid50 equivalents were extrapolated from standard curves generated by adding dilutions of rna extracted from a hcovemc/2012 stock with known virus titer in parallel to each run. animal numbers are indicated on the x axis. black bars indicate viral load at 1 dpi, white
bars indicate viral load at 3 dpi, and gray bars indicate viral load at 6 dpi.

pnas | october 8, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 41 | 16599

microbiology

downloaded at purdue university library on november 12, 2019

widespread dissemination of virus through the respiratory tract.

fig. 3. viral load in respiratory tissues of rhesus macaques inoculated with
mers-cov. rhesus macaques were euthanized on day 3 (black bars) and day
6 (white bars) postinfection and tissue samples were collected. rna was
extracted and viral load was determined as tcid50 equivalents by qrt-pcr.
tcid50 equivalents were extrapolated from standard curves generated by
adding dilutions of rna extracted from a hcov-emc/2012 stock with known
virus titer in parallel to each run. geometric mean viral loads were calculated; error bars represent sd. r, right; l, left; ln, lymph node.

downloaded at purdue university library on november 12, 2019

similar to those described as bronchiolitis obliterans organizing
pneumonia (fig. 5c). this organizing pneumonia consisted of
aggregations of ﬁbrin (fig. s3), macrophages, and sloughed pulmonary epithelium that ﬁll and occlude small airways, an early
lesion of bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia that
has yet to develop the characteristic dense collagenous stroma,
and marked inﬁltration of ﬁbroblasts that would occur if the
lesion was given time to mature. perivascular inﬁltrates of inﬂammatory cells were observed multifocally within and adjacent
to affected areas of the lung. animals necropsied at 6 dpi demonstrated moderate (fig. 6a) to marked (fig. 6b) changes in
the lungs with type ii pneumocyte hyperplasia (fig. 6c),
abundant alveolar edema, and ﬁbrin with formation of hyaline
membranes (fig. 6d).
mers-cov replicates in alveolar pneumocytes. at 3 dpi, in situ
hybridization (ish) demonstrated viral rna multifocally in the
lungs of all monkeys. the signal was found in spindle to polygonal cells along alveolar septae (fig. 5e). this location and the
cellular morphology suggested that virus replication occurs
mainly in the pulmonary epithelium. viral rna was not detected in endothelial cells. immunohistochemistry (ihc) yielded
similar results for the presence of viral antigen (fig. 5f). additionally, there were rare round mononuclear cells and stellate
cells within the cortex of the mediastinal lymph nodes that were
positive for both viral rna by ish and viral antigen by ihc.
these cells were morphologically consistent with cells of the
macrophage or dendritic cell lineage. viral rna and viral antigen could still be detected at 6 dpi (fig. 6 e and f).
to conﬁrm that virus replication occurred mainly in alveolar
pneumocytes, ﬂuorescent ihc was performed using anticytokeratin
and anticoronavirus antibodies. viral antigen was predominantly found in alveolar pneumocytes on 3 as well as 6 dpi (fig. s4
a and b). this distribution of viral antigen in type i and type ii
pneumocytes corresponded with the distribution of the receptor
for mers-cov, dpp4 (fig. s4 c and d) as indicated by ihc
performed on the lungs of infected animals.
16600 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1310744110

analysis of gene expression in lungs and pbmc. to assess genes that
may play a signiﬁcant role in disease pathology, we performed
a microarray analysis on lung tissue and pbmc. a welch’s t test
(p < 0.01, fold-change ≥ 2) was used to compare proﬁles of
signiﬁcant differentially expressed genes (deg) from the right
lower lung lobe to observable gross lesions, relative to uninfected
controls. the right lower lobe was selected, as qpcr demonstrated that viral genomes were present in those samples,
allowing us to compare sites of histopathologic injury to the
background transcriptional proﬁles of sites exposed to virus. on
day 3, we observed a total of 173 deg (fig. 7a and table s2),
although the expression was highly variable between animals and
sample sites. this variability is likely multifactorial, driven by
differences between individual animals, such as levels of virus in
the lung and at lesion sites, distribution of virus receptors, lung
sizes, age, and distribution and quantity of susceptible cells.
using ingenuity pathway analysis (ipa), we determined that the
majority of deg were associated with antiviral immunity, inﬂammation, and chemotaxis. notably, genes such as il-6, chemokine c-x-c ligand 1 (cxcl1), and matrix metalloproteinase
9 (mmp9) associated with proinﬂammatory processes and recruitment of inﬂammatory cells were signiﬁcantly up-regulated in
the lesions compared with the right lower lung lobes. by day 6,
we identiﬁed only 37 deg distinguishing right lower lung lobes
from lesions (fig. 7b and table s3), and these were not grouped
in any heavily enriched functional categories. additionally, by
6 dpi the lung lesions showed a higher magnitude of gene expression compared with the right lower lung lobe samples. this
ﬁnding may reﬂect the resolving clinical status of the animals at
day 6 postinfection, and indicate that substantial differences in
gene expression occur at sites of virus-induced injury rather than
throughout the lung.
we sought to determine if mers-cov–induced gene expression dynamics can be observed in pbmc and lung tissue and
lesion samples from infected macaques, and change over time.
using singular value decomposition-coupled multidimensional
scaling, we identiﬁed changes in gene expression occurring in
parallel in both organs (fig. s5). in pbmc a signiﬁcant response
to mers-cov infection is observed only on day 1 postinfection.
in lungs a signiﬁcant global response was found only 3 dpi (fig.
s5). by 6 dpi, the gene-expression dynamics in both organs
return close to an uninfected or baseline state. furthermore,
functional analysis with ipa reveals that mers-cov infection in
macaques leads to very rapid innate immune activation (14)
through pattern-recognition receptors. leukocyte activation is
evident in blood and lungs, as well as evidence of a robust but
self-limiting inﬂammatory response. importantly, innate immune

fig. 4. virus replication in the lungs of mers-cov inoculated rhesus macaques. transmission electron microscopy was performed on lung lesion
samples collected from mers-cov–inoculated macaques at 6 dpi. virus
particles (arrows) are visible in type i pneumocytes (left and right). (scale
bar, right, 250 nm; inset, 50 nm). b, basement membrane; e, endothelial cell;
p, pneumocytes; r, red blood cell.

de wit et al.

primate model, which recapitulates the respiratory disease observed in mild or moderate human cases but not the occasionally
occurring kidney disease.
in this rhesus macaque model, virus shedding as indicated by
qrt-pcr occurred predominantly via the nose and, to a limited
extent, the throat. in nasal swabs and bal, viral loads were
highest day 1 postinfection and decreased over time. however, at
6 dpi, two of three animals were still shedding virus from the respiratory tract. although mers-cov was detected in the upper
respiratory tract and the lymphoid tissue draining the lungs,
replication of mers-cov was most prominent in the lower
respiratory tract. mers-cov replicated predominantly in type
i and ii pneumocytes in the alveoli. these two cell types form
the main component of the architecture of the alveolar space
around the terminal bronchioles. this predominant replication
of mers-cov in alveoli may explain the limited amount of
virus shedding observed in our rhesus macaque model. in addition, the fact that human-to-human transmission so far seems
limited to a few family clusters in saudi arabia (6), the united
kingdom (7), and tunisia and nosocomial transmission in jordan,
saudi arabia (6), and france (9) might be explained by the propensity of the novel coronavirus to replicate deep down in the
lower respiratory tract. recently, dpp4 was identiﬁed as the receptor for mers-cov (12). dpp4 is an evolutionarily conserved

fig. 5. histopathological changes at 3 dpi in rhesus macaques inoculated
with mers-cov. rhesus macaques were euthanized on day 3 postinfection
and lung tissue was collected and stained with h&e. (a) mild acute interstitial pneumonia demonstrated by mild thickening of alveolar septae by
small numbers of neutrophils, macrophages, ﬁbrin, and edema. small
numbers of inﬂammatory cells and ﬁbrin also extend into alveolar spaces. (b)
marked interstitial pneumonia with bronchiolitis obliterans (arrow). airways
are ﬁlled with organizing ﬁbrin, necrotic debris, collagen and ﬁbroblasts.
there are numerous multinucleate syncytial cells scattered throughout the
alveoli (arrowhead). (c) bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia. (d)
alveolar capillary (asterisk) bounded by degenerate, vacuolated type i pulmonary epithelium. the alveolar space contains inﬂammatory cells and
a multinucleate syncytial cell (arrowhead). (e) ish demonstrates viral rna
predominantly within alveolar pneumocytes. (f) anticoronaviral ihc reveals
viral antigen within alveolar pneumocytes. (magniﬁcation: a and b, 200×; c,
e, and f, 400×; d, 1,000×.)

activation occurs very rapidly after infection, and is subsequently
also rapidly controlled, indicating quick resolution.

downloaded at purdue university library on november 12, 2019

plasma levels of 23 cytokines and chemokines were determined
in serum samples obtained at 0, 1, 3, and 6 dpi. transient differences were only observed for il-1ra, il-2, il-6, il-8, il-12,
il-13, il-15, ifn-γ, and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (mcp1). at 1 dpi serum levels of il-1ra, il-2, il-13, il-15, inf-γ,
and mcp-1 were signiﬁcantly higher than at 0 dpi and all levels
returned to baseline by 6 dpi (fig. s6). although the serum level
of il-6 was higher and serum levels of il-8 and il-12 were lower
at 1 dpi, these differences were not statistically signiﬁcant.
discussion
the emergence of mers-cov in 2012 was the second introduction in 10 y of a novel coronavirus, causing severe respiratory disease, into the human population. both the severity
of the respiratory disease and the genetic similarity to betacoronaviruses isolated from bats are reminiscent of the emergence
of sars-cov in 2003, which resulted in 8,422 human cases with
916 deaths in over 30 countries (15). to understand the disease
caused by mers-cov in humans, we developed a nonhuman
de wit et al.

fig. 6. histopathological changes at 6 dpi in rhesus macaques inoculated
with mers-cov. rhesus macaques were euthanized at 6 dpi and lung tissue
was collected and stained with h&e. (a) mild acute interstitial pneumonia
demonstrated by mild thickening of alveolar septae by small numbers of
neutrophils, macrophages, ﬁbrin, and edema. small numbers of inﬂammatory
cells and ﬁbrin also extend into alveolar spaces. (b) marked interstitial pneumonia with extensive type ii pneumocyte hyperplasia (arrow). alveolar spaces
are ﬂooded with edema ﬂuid, ﬁbrin, and inﬂammatory cells. (c ) type ii
pneumocyte hyperplasia (arrow) with alveolar ﬂooding edema and ﬁbrin.
(d) hyaline membranes line alveolar space (arrowhead). (e) ish demonstrates
viral rna predominantly within alveolar pneumocytes. (f) anticoronaviral ihc
reveals viral antigen within alveolar pneumocytes. (magniﬁcation: a and b,
200×; c–f, 400×.)

pnas | october 8, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 41 | 16601

microbiology

cytokine and chemokine proﬁles in mers-cov–infected animals.

downloaded at purdue university library on november 12, 2019

fig. 7. microarray analysis of gene expression in lungs of rhesus macaques
inoculated with mers-cov. the heatmap shows log10 ratios to uninfected
controls of differentially expressed genes in the right lung lower lobe and
lung lesion samples as determined by welch’s t test (p < 0.01, fold-change ≥
2), and grouped by hierarchical clustering. a representation is shown of 173
differentially expressed genes from individual animals and sample sites at 3
dpi (a) and of 37 differentially expressed genes from individual animals and
sample sites at 6 dpi (b). functional analysis was performed on subgroups of
the day 3 differentially expressed genes, and enriched functional categories
identiﬁed by ipa are shown in the blue and red vertical bars to the right of
the heatmap in a. differentially expressed genes are speciﬁed in table s2
(3 dpi) and table s3 (6 dpi).

type ii transmembrane glycoprotein expressed on endothelial and
epithelial cells, in lungs and kidney. currently, the exact distribution of dpp4 throughout the human respiratory tract is unknown,
although dpp4 expression has been observed in vitro in human
bronchiolar epithelial cells (12). in mouse lungs, dpp4 is present
on type i and type ii pneumocytes in the alveoli, with expression
on type i pneumocytes more abundant than on type ii pneumocytes (16). the distribution of dpp4 is in agreement with our
observation of mers-cov virus replication in the alveoli and
suggests a role for dpp4 in tissue tropism of the novel coronavirus. a more thorough analysis of dpp4 distribution in the
human airway is needed to examine the apparent alveolar restriction of virus replication and whether efﬁcient human-tohuman transmission might be restricted by the receptor distribution,
similar to what has been described for highly pathogenic avian
inﬂuenza a/h5n1 viruses (17, 18). no virus replication was observed in kidney samples from mers-cov–infected rhesus macaques. this ﬁnding could indicate that the renal failure reported in
16602 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1310744110

some of the human cases might be a result of hypoxia rather than
virus replication in the kidney, or of other underlying, preexisting
medical conditions.
currently, few clinical and no pathological data are available
on the human cases of mers-cov. in addition, the data that
are available might be biased toward severe cases in need of
hospitalization, as there is no information on the prevalence of
mers-cov in the general population. recent reports have
revealed that the majority of the severe human mers-cov
cases have underlying medical conditions, potentially negatively
affecting outcome of disease in these patients (2, 8, 9, 19). as
such, a direct comparison of the pathogenesis of the novel
coronavirus observed in the rhesus macaque model to that in
humans should be approached cautiously. however, the transient nature of disease observed in rhesus macaques suggests that
this model does not exactly recapitulate the disease observed in
the fatal cases of mers-cov, likely because of the health status
of these animals compared with severe human mers cases.
rather, the mers-cov–associated disease observed in rhesus
macaques, and the variation observed between individual animals, may be more similar to the recent, less-severe cases of
mers-cov identiﬁed in the united kingdom and saudi arabia.
interestingly, the disease displayed in the rhesus macaques is
reminiscent of sars-cov in nonhuman primates, because a wide
disease spectrum was reported in the different sars-cov studies
in nonhuman primates (20–27).
in the case of sars-cov, the ability to cause severe disease in
a macaque model was associated with an exacerbated innate host
response in aged animals (10–19 y old) (28). the majority of
human cases of mers-cov have been middle aged and aged
male individuals (39–73 y old) (6). in the rhesus macaques inoculated with mers-cov, no difference in severity of disease
could be attributed to age (6–12 y old, young adult) or sex, but
low animal numbers used here do not allow a ﬁrm conclusion
and we cannot exclude that severe disease could be age dependent in the mers-cov model described herein.
proinﬂammatory cytokines are likely to play an important role
in the observed acute lung injury observed in the fatal human
cases. the up-regulation of the expression levels of proinﬂammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as il-6, cxcl1,
and mmp9 in the rhesus macaques and the associated cytokine
and chemokine levels in serum samples may have resulted in
chemotaxis and activation of neutrophils. indeed, increased
numbers of neutrophils were observed in the blood of all animals
on 1 dpi, in accordance with what has been reported for the ﬁrst
human case (2).
the transient, self-limiting nature of mers-cov infection in
rhesus macaques was displayed at various levels within the
model. transient patterns were observed for virus shedding, viral
loads in tissues, neutrophilia, type ii pneumocyte hyperplasia,
regulation of host gene expression, and production of cytokines.
the controlled ifn-mediated innate immune response was very
rapid and resolved within the ﬁrst 3 d. correlation of geneexpression dynamics between pbmc and lung-tissue samples also
suggests that circulating proﬁles may have utility as a means of
assessing host responses to infection without requiring an invasive
tissue biopsy.
taken together, our study provides data on the extent and
duration of respiratory disease caused by the novel coronavirus
in rhesus macaques. mers-cov primarily affects the epithelium
of the lower respiratory tract in a transient manner. this tropism
of mers-cov for the lower respiratory tract explains both the
severity of the disease observed in humans and the limited
number of cases of human-to-human transmission to date.
materials and methods
ethics statement. all animal experiments were approved by the institutional
animal care and use committee of the rocky mountain laboratories, and

de wit et al.

performed following the guidelines of the association for assessment and
accreditation of laboratory animal care, international (aaalac) by certiﬁed
staff in an aaalac-approved facility.
the work with infectious mers-cov was approved under biosafety level3 conditions by the institutional biosafety committee. sample inactivation
was performed according to standard operating procedures approved by
the institutional biosafety committee for removal of specimens from high
containment.
virus and cells. mers-cov isolate hcov-emc/2012 was kindly provided by the
viroscience laboratory, erasmus medical center, rotterdam, the netherlands, and propagated in veroe6 cells in dmem (sigma) supplemented with
2% (vol/vol) fcs (logan), 1 mm l-glutamine (lonza), 50 u/ml penicillin, and
50 μg/ml streptomycin (gibco).
animal study and sample collection. six rhesus macaques (four males, two
females; age 6–10 y, weight 5–10 kg) were inoculated with 7 × 106 tcid50 of
mers-cov isolate hcov-emc/2012, as described previously (13). for detailed
information, see si materials and methods.

microarray data and functional analysis. rna extracted from lung tissue
samples and pbmc was run on agilent rhesus macaque 4 × 44 k microarrays
(agilent technologies) using the manufacturer’s one-color analysis protocol.
raw array data were uploaded to genedata analyst 7.6 (genedata) and
further analyzed. raw microarray data have been deposited in national
center for biotechnology information’s gene expression omnibus (geo)
database under geo accession no. gse44542, and are also available to the
public at http://viromics.washington.edu. for detailed information, see si
materials and methods.
serum cytokine and chemokine analysis. concentrations of cytokines and
chemokines in serum were measured using the non-human primate cytokine
milliplex map 23-plex kit (millipore) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. see si materials and methods for more information.

rna extraction. rna was extracted from swabs, bal, and whole blood
samples using the qiaamp viral rna kit (qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. tissues (30 mg) were homogenized in rlt buffer and
rna was extracted using the rneasy kit (qiagen).

acknowledgments. we thank drs. bart haagmans and ron fouchier at
the erasmus medical center for providing middle east respiratory coronavirus isolate hcov-emc/2012; ralph baric at the university of north carolina
at chapel hill for subgenomic rna primer sequences; laura baseler, tina
thomas, dan long, and rebecca rosenke for histopathology; the staff of the
rocky mountain veterinary branch for assistance with the animal experiments; and anita mora for ﬁgure preparation. this research was supported
by the intramural research program of the national institute of allergy and
infectious diseases, national institutes of health; a.l.r., a.g.b., a.o.,
and m.g.k. are funded through grant u54 ai081680, national institute of
allergy and infectious diseases regional centers of excellence, national
institutes of health/national institute of allergy and infectious diseases
contract hhsn272200800060c, and national institutes of health grant
p51od010425 (washington national primate center).

1. van boheemen s, et al. (2012) genomic characterization of a newly discovered coronavirus associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome in humans. mbio 3(6):pii
e00473-12.
2. zaki am, van boheemen s, bestebroer tm, osterhaus ad, fouchier ra (2012) isolation
of a novel coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in saudi arabia. n engl j med
367(19):1814–1820.
3. annan a, et al. (2013) human betacoronavirus 2c emc/2012-related viruses in bats,
ghana and europe. emerg infect dis 19(3):456–459.
4. anthony sj, et al. (2013) coronaviruses in bats from mexico. j gen virol 94(pt 5):
1028–1038.
5. de groot rj, et al. (2013) middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov):
announcement of the coronavirus study group. j virol 87(14):7790–7792.
6. who (2013) coronavirus infections. available at www.who.int/csr/don/archive/
disease/coronavirus_infections/en/index.html. accessed august 30, 2013.
7. health protection agency uk novel cornoavirus investigation team (2013) evidence
of person-to-person transmission within a family cluster of novel coronavirus infections, united kingdom, february 2013. euro surveill 18(11):20427.
8. assiri a, et al.; ksa mers-cov investigation team (2013) hospital outbreak of middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus. n engl j med 369(5):407–416.
9. guery b, et al.; mers-cov study group (2013) clinical features and viral diagnosis of
two cases of infection with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus: a report
of nosocomial transmission. lancet 381(9885):2265–2272.
10. kindler e, et al. (2013) efﬁcient replication of the novel human betacoronavirus emc
on primary human epithelium highlights its zoonotic potential. mbio 4(1):e00611-12.
11. chan rw, et al. (2013) tropism of and innate immune responses to the novel human
betacoronavirus lineage c virus in human ex vivo respiratory organ cultures. j virol
87(12):6604–6614.
12. raj vs, et al. (2013) dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging
human coronavirus-emc. nature 495(7440):251–254.
13. munster vj, de wit e, feldmann h (2013) pneumonia from human coronavirus in
a macaque model. n engl j med 368(16):1560–1562.
14. jacquelin b, et al. (2009) nonpathogenic siv infection of african green monkeys induces a strong but rapidly controlled type i ifn response. j clin invest 119(12):
3544–3555.

15. peiris js, yuen ky, osterhaus ad, stöhr k (2003) the severe acute respiratory syndrome. n engl j med 349(25):2431–2441.
16. mentzel s, dijkman hb, van son jp, koene ra, assmann kj (1996) organ distribution
of aminopeptidase a and dipeptidyl peptidase iv in normal mice. j histochem cytochem
44(5):445–461.
17. shinya k, et al. (2006) avian ﬂu: inﬂuenza virus receptors in the human airway. nature 440(7083):435–436.
18. van riel d, et al. (2006) h5n1 virus attachment to lower respiratory tract. science
312(5772):399.
19. drosten c, et al. (2013) clinical features and virological analysis of a case of middle
east respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection. lancet infect dis 13(9):745–751.
20. fouchier ra, et al. (2003) aetiology: koch’s postulates fulﬁlled for sars virus. nature
423(6937):240.
21. greenough tc, et al. (2005) pneumonitis and multi-organ system disease in common
marmosets (callithrix jacchus) infected with the severe acute respiratory syndromeassociated coronavirus. am j pathol 167(2):455–463.
22. haagmans bl, osterhaus ad (2006) nonhuman primate models for sars. plos med
3(5):e194.
23. kuiken t, et al. (2003) newly discovered coronavirus as the primary cause of severe
acute respiratory syndrome. lancet 362(9380):263–270.
24. lawler jv, et al. (2006) cynomolgus macaque as an animal model for severe acute
respiratory syndrome. plos med 3(5):e149.
25. mcauliffe j, et al. (2004) replication of sars coronavirus administered into the respiratory tract of african green, rhesus and cynomolgus monkeys. virology 330(1):
8–15.
26. qin c, et al. (2005) an animal model of sars produced by infection of macaca mulatta with sars coronavirus. j pathol 206(3):251–259.
27. rowe t, et al. (2004) macaque model for severe acute respiratory syndrome. j virol
78(20):11401–11404.
28. smits sl, et al. (2010) exacerbated innate host response to sars-cov in aged nonhuman primates. plos pathog 6(2):e1000756.
29. munster vj, et al. (2012) rapid nipah virus entry into the central nervous system of
hamsters via the olfactory route. sci rep 2:736.
30. corman vm, et al. (2012) detection of a novel human coronavirus by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. euro surveill 17(39):pii 20285.

histopathology, ish, and ihc. histopathology, ish, and ihc were performed on
macaque tissues. for detailed information, see si materials and methods.

microbiology

transmission electron microscopy. transmission electron microscopy was performed essentially as described previously (29). for detailed information, see
si materials and methods.

downloaded at purdue university library on november 12, 2019

quantitative pcr. for detection of viral rna, we used the one-step real-time
rt-pcr upe assay (30); for the detection of mrna, we used an orf1- and
orf5-speciﬁc sybr green assay. see si materials and methods for detailed
information.

de wit et al.

pnas | october 8, 2013 | vol. 110 | no. 41 | 16603

