chest
electronic cigarettes
no such thing as a free
lunch…or puff
of pulmonary and cardiac mediascine,practitioners
many of us have no doubt been asked by our

patients who smoke about so-called “electronic cigarettes” (e-cigarettes). these devices, termed electronic nicotine delivery systems (ends) by the world
health organization, have been available in the us
market since 2007. our patients have likely heard
far more about these devices through marketing,
chat rooms, and word of mouth, than we as physicians have through the medical literature. because
ends are not currently regulated by the us food
and drug administration (fda) as medical devices—
recent court decisions, denied the agency the right
to such oversight—manufacturers of ends have not
been required to establish either safety or efﬁ
ﬁcacy,
and we have had few data with which to answer our
patients’ queries about these products. are e-cigarettes
a smoking cessation tool? are they a harmless alternative to cigarettes, as manufacturers claim?
t (see page 1400), vardavas et all1
in this issue of chest
evaluated the immediate effect of e-cigarette vapors
on airway mechanics. subjects, healthy smokers without chronic lung disease, inhaled the vapors of a
commercially available e-cigarette for 5 min. a comprehensive analysis of lung function, including oscillometry and spirometry, revealed that after inhaling
e-cigarette vapors, subjects had a signiﬁcant
ﬁ
increase
in airway resistance. there were no signiﬁcant
ﬁ
effects
on fev1, fvc, or fev1/fvc ratio. subjects also
had measurable, signiﬁcant decreases in fraction of
exhaled nitric oxide (feno). control subjects inhaling
vaporless control cigarettes did not have any changes
in airway resistance or feno. this pattern of changes
in airway mechanics and feno experienced by subjects using e-cigarettes is very similar to that seen
shortly after inhalation of tobacco smoke.2 the implication is that with long-term exposure to ends,
it is plausible that, as with cigarette smoking, there
is the potential for more permanent changes in lung
function. the study’s authors correctly point out that
www.chestpubs.org

editorials
chest | volume 141 | number 6 | june 2012

this is conjectural and that further research on the
long-term effects of ends is needed.
numerous manufacturers market ends, but the
devices share key design features. they use a batteryoperated heating device that vaporizes a nicotinecontaining solution from a replaceable cartridge in
a process triggered by the pressure drop that occurs
when the user inhales from the device. they resemble
cigarettes, and, in addition to providing nicotine in
inhaled form, replicate some of the behavioral aspects
of cigarette smoking. cartridges come with various
concentrations of nicotine, and reﬁll solutions containing large amounts of nicotine are available.3 the
most common vehicle in which the nicotine in such
cartridges is contained is propylene glycol, though
other chemicals may be used. the efﬁciency of systemic nicotine delivery with the e-cigarette is highly
variable,4 and the pharmacokinetics of nicotine delivery appear to more closely resemble those of nicotine replacement therapies than that of cigarettes.5
marketing materials for ends commonly emphasize the safety of the devices in comparison with cigarettes, claiming that the aerosols or vapors delivered
by the devices are “tar free” and lack the carcinogens and other chemicals found in cigarette smoke.
because of concerns about running afoul of the fda,
ends are not speciﬁcally marketed as smoking cessation aids.
users of ends tend to be former or current
smokers who choose ends for a variety of reasons,
including the markedly reduced cost compared with
cigarettes, the ability to use the devices in settings
in which cigarette smoking is prohibited, the curbing
of nicotine cravings, and the perceived lower toxicity
compared with traditional tobacco cigarettes.6 no
randomized controlled clinical trials have evaluated
ends as smoking cessation tools. ends appear
to be most commonly used by current smokers as
an alternative to cigarettes rather than as cessation
tools, although some ends users do reduce or eliminate cigarette use.7 given the relatively short time
that ends have been available, long-term patterns
of use are not clear, and it is plausible that, as with
cigarettes and other forms of nicotine, some users
will use the devices for prolonged periods. we as
physicians, and they as our patients, need and deserve
chest / 141 / 6 / june, 2012

downloaded from chestjournal.chestpubs.org by kimberly henricks on june 5, 2012
© 2012 american college of chest physicians

1371

the information necessary to make informed choices
and recommendations about the safety of these devices
as alternatives to cigarettes and other available therapies for smoking cessation. although the fda has
pledged to regulate these devices as tobacco products, it is unclear what this will entail and how it will
change the availability, marketing, manufacturing, and
quality control of these devices.
the study by vardavas and colleagues,1 although
modest in its size, scope, and conclusions, provides
some much needed data on the potential harm of
e-cigarettes. clearly, more studies are needed on the
long-term effects of these devices, especially in patients
with chronic airways disease. in the interim, we now
have enough information to state that the use of the
ends does cause at least short-term adverse effects
that are similar to those of cigarettes, and to tell our
patients that there is no such thing as a free lunch…
or, in the case of ends, a (harm-) free puff.
mark v. avdalovic, md
susan murin, md, fccp
sacramento, ca
afﬁliations:
ﬁ
from the division of pulmonary,
y critical care, and
sleep
p medicine, department
p
of internal medicine, universityy of
california, davis, school of medicine; and va northern california
healthcare system
y
.
financial/nonﬁ
ﬁnancial disclosures: the authors have reported
p
to chest
t that no p
potential conﬂicts of interest exist with anyy
companies/organizations
p
g
whose products or services may be discussed in this article.
correspondence
p
to: susan murin, md, fccp, division of
pulmonary,
y critical care, and sleep
p medicine, universityy of
california, davis, 4150 v st, ste 3400, sacramento, ca 95817;
e-mail: susan.murin@ucdmc.ucdavis.edu
© 2012 american college
g of chest physicians.
y
reproduction
p
of this article is p
prohibited without written p
permission from the
american college
g of chest physicians.
y
see online for more details.
doi: 10.1378/chest.12-0205

references
1. vardavas ci, anagnostopoulos n, kougias m, evangelopoulou v,
connolly gn, behrakis pk. short-term pulmonary effects of
using an electronic cigarette: impact on respiratory ﬂ
ﬂow resistance, impedance, and exhaled nitric oxide. chestt. 2012;141(6):
1400-1406.
2. karrasch s, ernst k, behr j, et al; kora study group. exhaled
nitric oxide and inﬂuencing factors in a random population
sample. respir med. 2011;105(5):713-718.
3. cobb nk, abrams db. e-cigarette or drug-delivery device?
regulating novel nicotine products. n engl j med. 2011;
365(3):193-195.
4. eissenberg t. electronic nicotine delivery devices: ineffective
nicotine delivery and craving suppression after acute administration. tob control. 2010;19(1):87-88.
5. bullen c, mcrobbie h, thornley s, glover m, lin r,
laugesen m. effect of an electronic nicotine delivery device
(e cigarette) on desire to smoke and withdrawal, user preferences and nicotine delivery: randomised cross-over trial.
tob control. 2010;19(2):98-103.
6. etter jf, bullen c. electronic cigarette: users proﬁle,
ﬁ utilization, satisfaction and perceived efﬁ
ﬁcacy. addiction. 2011;
106(11):2017-2028.

7. polosa r, caponnetto p, morjaria jb, papale g, campagna d,
russo c. effect of an electronic nicotine delivery device
(e-cigarette) on smoking reduction and cessation: a prospective 6-month pilot study. bmc public health. 2011;11:786.

the pharyngeal airway
is bigger really better?
issue of chest
t (see page 1407), yamashiro
inandthiskryger
report the results from a consecutive
1

series of patients with obstructive sleep apnea (osa)
who underwent ct scans. the authors observed
important associations between pharyngeal airway
length and various risk factors for osa (including
age and sex) and postulated that “laryngeal descent,”
perhaps having evolved for speech, may have consequences from the standpoint of pharyngeal mechanics.
the article helps to corroborate existing literature
and provides an opportunity to consider the mechanical basis underlying pharyngeal airway collapse in
humans.
in discussing pharyngeal airway length, an important distinction must be made between the intrinsic
length of the airway vs the length that may result
from changes in longitudinal tension. in the former,
physical principles as well as computational modeling
and human experimental data all support the concept
that a longer airway is more vulnerable to pharyngeal
collapse during inspiration than would be a shorter
airway.2 for a given negative intrapharyngeal pressure, the force per unit area would favor collapse in
the longer airway as compared with a shorter one.
moreover, the radius of curvature (in the longitudinal direction) will be larger in a long airway than
it will be in a short airway, and based on the law of
laplace, less negative intrapharyngeal pressure would
be required to reduce airway volume through longitudinal bending; the longer airway is more susceptible
to collapse. on the other hand, if an airway is lengthened through increased longitudinal tension, it may be
less susceptible to inspiratory collapse due to stiffening
in the airway walls through changes in the tube law.3
similar arguments can be made regarding the
diameter in the pharyngeal airway, which could be
intrinsically small or could be made smaller by extraluminal forces (eg, parapharyngeal fat deposition).4
in the case of the intrinsically small-diameter airway,
one would predict protection from collapse based on
the small area upon which a given intrapharyngeal
negative pressure is acting. in other words, based on
the law of laplace, increased negative pressure is
required to collapse a tube with small radius of curvature (ie, small diameter airway) than that required
for a larger one; the smaller one is less susceptible

1372

editorials

downloaded from chestjournal.chestpubs.org by kimberly henricks on june 5, 2012
© 2012 american college of chest physicians

