am j physiol lung cell mol physiol 313: l278–l292, 2017.
first published may 11, 2017; doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016.

research article

electronic cigarettes: not all good news?

flavored e-cigarette liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory innate
immune cell function
x phillip w. clapp,1,2 erica a. pawlak,2 justin t. lackey,3 james e. keating,3 steven l. reeber,3
gary l. glish,3 and ilona jaspers1,2
1

curriculum in toxicology, school of medicine, university of north carolina, chapel hill, north carolina; 2center for
environmental medicine, asthma, and lung biology, school of medicine, university of north carolina, chapel hill, north
carolina; and 3department of chemistry, university of north carolina, chapel hill, north carolina

submitted 6 october 2016; accepted in final form 4 may 2016

clapp pw, pawlak ea, lackey jt, keating je, reeber sl,
glish gl, jaspers i. flavored e-cigarette liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory innate immune cell function. am j physiol
lung cell mol physiol 313: l278 –l292, 2017. first published may
11, 2017; doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016.—innate immune cells of
the respiratory tract are the first line of defense against pathogenic and
environmental insults. failure of these cells to perform their immune
functions leaves the host susceptible to infection and may contribute
to impaired resolution of inflammation. while combustible tobacco
cigarettes have been shown to suppress respiratory immune cell
function, the effects of flavored electronic cigarette liquids (e-liquids)
and individual flavoring agents on respiratory immune cell responses
are unknown. we investigated the effects of seven flavored nicotinefree e-liquids on primary human alveolar macrophages, neutrophils,
and natural killer (nk) cells. cells were challenged with a range of
e-liquid dilutions and assayed for their functional responses to pathogenic stimuli. end points included phagocytic capacity (neutrophils
and macrophages), neutrophil extracellular trap formation, proinflammatory cytokine production, and cell-mediated cytotoxic response
(nk cells). e-liquids were then analyzed via mass spectrometry to
identify individual flavoring components. three cinnamaldehydecontaining e-liquids exhibited dose-dependent broadly immunosuppressive effects. quantitative mass spectrometry was used to determine concentrations of cinnamaldehyde in each of the three e-liquids,
and cells were subsequently challenged with a range of cinnamaldehyde concentrations. cinnamaldehyde alone recapitulated the impaired function observed with e-liquid exposures, and cinnamaldehyde-induced suppression of macrophage phagocytosis was reversed
by addition of the small-molecule reducing agent 1,4-dithiothreitol.
we conclude that cinnamaldehyde has the potential to impair respiratory immune cell function, illustrating an immediate need for further
toxicological evaluation of chemical flavoring agents to inform regulation governing their use in e-liquid formulations.
e-cigarette; e-liquid; cinnamaldehyde; innate immune cell function

the leading cause of preventable
death, accounting for 12% of all mortalities among adults
worldwide (69a). a link between cigarette smoke exposure,
suppression of respiratory immune responses, and enhanced
susceptibility to respiratory infection is well established (28 –
30, 32, 50, 51, 56). while tobacco use is steadily declining in
the united states, electronic cigarettes (e-cigarettes) are rap-

smoking continues to be

address for reprint requests and other correspondence: i. jaspers, univ. of
north carolina at chapel hill, 104 mason farm rd., chapel hill, nc
27599-7310 (e-mail: ilona_jaspers@med.unc.edu).
l278

idly gaining popularity, particularly among teens and young
adults (4) who often perceive these products as less harmful
than traditional cigarettes (2). this perception is in part the
result of targeted marketing that identifies these products as a
“safer alternative” to traditional cigarettes (55); however, little
is known regarding the effects of “vaping” on respiratory
innate immune cell function. a recent study by sussan et al.
reported that mice exposed to e-cigarette aerosols exhibited
impaired bacterial clearance and increased susceptibility to
respiratory virus infection (64). furthermore, lung macrophages from these exposed mice exhibited reduced phagocytic
capacity. more recently, hwang et al. exposed human epithelial cell lines, murine alveolar macrophages, and human neutrophils to “e-cigarette vapor extract” and observed dosedependent cytotoxicity and reduced antimicrobial activity
against staphylococcus aureus (31). the findings in both
publications were largely attributed to the immunosuppressive
effects of nicotine; however, reactive carbonyls present in
these flavored e-liquids and generated by e-cigarette devices
may also play a role in the observed immunomodulatory
effects (18, 38, 61).
e-cigarette devices aerosolize flavored e-liquids, which are
typically composed of humectants [propylene glycol (pg)
and/or vegetable glycerin (vg)], chemical flavorings, and
nicotine. there are currently more than 7,700 commercially
available e-liquids which contain flavorings that have not been
evaluated for inhalational toxicity (73). while many of these
flavorings are classified as generally recognized as safe
(gras) for oral consumption by the united states food and
drug administration (fda), prolonged inhalation of some
gras flavorings, such as diacetyl, 2,3-pentanedione, and
acetoin, can cause irreversible lung disease (27b, 27c, 39).
gras chemicals commonly used as e-liquid flavoring agents
include aliphatic aldehydes (for fruity flavors) and aromatic
aldehydes (for sweet and spicy flavors) (27a, 68a). the flavor
and extract manufacturers association (fema) has identified
over 1,000 gras flavorings that may pose a respiratory hazard
due to possible volatility and irritant properties (18a); however,
it is unclear whether these flavorings, in the context of e-cigarette exposures, directly impact respiratory innate immune
cells. previous studies have demonstrated that vanillin and
cinnamaldehyde, aromatic aldehydes commonly used as e-liquid flavoring and odorant agents, can suppress macrophage
function (14, 34, 36, 37, 45, 47, 57, 72). however, most of
these studies were conducted in nonhuman cell lines without

1040-0605/17 copyright © 2017 the american physiological society

http://www.ajplung.org

downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

direct relevance to the lung. consequently, how exposure of
innate immune cells patrolling the respiratory tract to these
flavoring chemicals induces potential functional changes is
unknown.
the testing paradigm we chose to address this knowledge
gap was to screen popular e-liquids for their potential to alter
innate immune cell function, identify common flavoring agents
in the e-liquids eliciting a response, and investigate whether
exposure to a shared flavoring agent alone could recapitulate
the observed response. to this end, we collected alveolar
macrophages, peripheral blood neutrophils, and natural killer
(nk) cells from healthy nonsmoker volunteers and exposed the
cells to varying dilutions of nicotine-free flavored e-liquids and
evaluated changes in normal immune functions. the chemical
composition of e-liquids that altered immune cell responses
was determined, and a shared chemical flavoring, cinnamaldehyde, was investigated for its role in the e-liquid-induced
effects on respiratory immune cell function.
materials and methods

subjects. healthy individuals between the ages of 18 and 49 yr
were recruited to donate venous blood for the isolation of neutrophils
or nk cells or to undergo bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage
for the collection of alveolar macrophages. subjects donating venous
blood were healthy, nonsmoking, nonvaping adults who are not
routinely exposed to secondhand smoke. exclusion criterial included
pregnant or nursing females or individuals with a history of egg
allergy, allergic rhinitis, aspirin therapy, asthma, immunodeficiency
(human immunodeficiency virus or other), guillain-barre syndrome,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), cardiac disease, any
chronic cardiorespiratory condition, or fever/respiratory illness within
3 wk before entry into study.
subjects undergoing bronchoscopy received a physical examination, a routine blood panel with complete blood count and differential,
serum electrolyte, glucose, and liver enzyme testing. female subjects
had to have a negative urine pregnancy test before bronchoscopy, and
all volunteers were required to be free of chronic cardiovascular or
respiratory illness and of acute respiratory illness within the proceeding 3 wk. all subjects undergoing bronchoscopy had forced expiratory
volume in s (fev1) and forced vital capacity (fvc) ⱖ80% predicted
and fev1/fvc ⱖ80% predicted normal for height and age, and were
nonvapers and nonsmokers with no smoking history.
subjects were matched for sex, age, and body mass index between
experimental conditions. participants in this study were not currently
taking immunosuppressive drugs, including corticosteroids. informed
consent was obtained from all subjects, and all studies were approved
by the university of north carolina at chapel hill school of medicine
institutional review board.
alveolar macrophage isolation. bronchoalveolar lavage (bal)
fluid was collected during bronchoscopy as previously described (23).
briefly, a flexible fiber optic bronchoscope was inserted transnasally
and wedged in a subsegment of the medial segment of the right middle
lobe (5th or 6th generation). saline was instilled and immediately
aspirated to recover alveolar leukocytes. recovered bal fluid was
centrifuged, and cells (⬎95% alveolar macrophages) were collected in
rpmi-1640 medium (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma).
neutrophil isolation. venous blood was collected in vacutainer
tubes containing ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (edta) and allowed to cool to room temperature with gentle rocking before cell
isolation. neutrophils were isolated by density centrifugation of venous blood over histopaque 1119 (sigma-aldrich, st. louis, mo) and
subsequently over a discontinuous percoll (ge healthcare life sciences, marlborough, ma) gradient as previously described (10, 19).
isolated neutrophils were resuspended in rpmi-1640 medium con-

l279

taining 10 mm hepes buffer and 0.5% fetal bovine serum (fbs).
cells were incubated at 37°c and 5% co2 for 30 min before
challenges.
nk cell isolation. venous blood was collected in vacutainer
tubes containing heparin and allowed to cool to room temperature
with gentle rocking before cell isolation. blood was diluted 1:4
with pbs and centrifuged over lymphoprep density gradient
medium (stemcell technologies, vancouver, canada) to fractionate whole blood components. the plasma and peripheral blood
mononuclear cell fractions were harvested and briefly washed with
pbs. nk cells were isolated from the peripheral blood mononuclear
cell fraction using negative antibody selection with the dynabeads
untouched human nk cell negative selection kit (thermo fisher
scientific). purified nk cells were kept at 37°c and 5% co2 in
rpmi-1640 medium with 10% fbs before challenges.
flavored e-cigarette liquids. a panel of seven flavored nicotinefree e-liquids was purchased from a local vendor (the vapor girl,
chapel hill, nc). e-liquids were selected for this study based on
either a “top-seller” designation (“menthol tobacco” and “solid
menthol”) or their likelihood to contain chemical flavorings identified
as potential respiratory hazards by fema, such as cinnamaldehyde
(“hot cinnamon candies,” “kola,” and “sini-cide”) and isoamyl
acetate (“banana pudding” and “banana”). e-liquids were stored in
opaque glass bottles at room temperature and were diluted for use at
the time of each experiment. all e-liquids used in this study were
reported by the manufacturer to contain the humectants pg and vg at
relative proportions of 55% and 45%, respectively. a mixture of 55%
pg (thermo fisher scientific) and 45% vg (sigma-aldrich) was
used as a vehicle control for all e-liquid experiments.
stimulation and quantification of neutrophil extracellular traps.
neutrophils were seeded at a density of 1 ⫻ 105 in 100 ␮l volume/
well of a cell culture-treated 96-well plate and allowed to incubate at
37°c and 5% co2 for 30 min. cells were then challenged with a final
concentration of 1.0% e-liquid diluted in cell culture medium with or
without 25 nm phorbol 12-myristate,13-acetate (pma; sigma-aldrich), a protein kinase c (pkc) activator and potent neutrophil
extracellular trap (net) agonist. wells were assayed for extracellular
chromatin every hour during a 4-h challenge. chromatin extruded by
activated neutrophils was digested with 500 mu/ml micrococcal
nuclease (worthington biochemical, lakewood, nj). micrococcal
nuclease activity was quenched with 5 mm edta following a 10-min
digestion at 37°c. chromatin released at each time point was quantified using the picogreen double-stranded dna kit (life technologies, carlsbad, ca) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
immunofluorescent analysis of nets. neutrophils were seeded on
13-mm round glass coverslips (0.15 mm thick) and challenged with
1.0% e-liquid diluted in cell culture medium with or without 25 nm
pma. cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (pfa; sigmaaldrich) every hour during a 4-h challenge, and immunolabeling was
conducted as described by brinkmann et al. (10). neutrophils were
blocked [5% normal donkey serum (jackson immunoresearch, west
grove, pa), 1% gelatin from cold water fish skin (sigma-aldrich),
1% bovine serum albumin (sigma-aldrich), and 0.05% tween 20
(sigma-aldrich) in pbs (gibco/thermo fisher scientific)] and
incubated with a mouse anti-human neutrophil elastase primary antibody (dako, carpentaria, ca) that was detected with an alexa fluor
488-conjugated secondary antibody (jackson immunoresearch).
negative controls were conducted using isotype-matched (igg1␬)
labeling of nets at each time point. chromatin was labeled with
hoechst 33342 (thermo fisher scientific). coverslips were mounted
on microscope slides with prolong gold antifade mountant (thermo
fisher scientific), and the edges were sealed with clear fingernail
polish. cells were imaged using a nikon digital eclipse c-1 modular
confocal microscope and plan apo vc 60 ⫻ /1.40 oil objective.
neutrophil and alveolar macrophage phagocytosis. neutrophils
isolated from venous blood were seeded at a density of 1 ⫻ 105
cells/well of a black clear-bottom 96-well plate in rpmi-1640 media

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

l280

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

with 10 mm hepes buffer (sigma-aldrich) and 0.5% fbs (gibco/
thermo fisher scientific). cells were allowed to incubate at 37°c and
5% co2 for 30 min. neutrophils were then challenged in triplicate
with a final concentration of 1, 0.5, or 0.25% e-liquid diluted in cell
culture medium for 30 min. opsonized phrodo red s. aureus bioparticles (thermo fisher scientific) were prepared according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and added to each well following e-liquid
challenge. neutrophils and bioparticles were incubated at 37°c and
5% co2 for an additional 4 h to assess e-liquid-induced changes in
phagocytic capacity.
cells obtained from bal fluid were seeded at a density of 5 ⫻ 104
cells/well of a black clear-bottom 96-well plate (corning life sciences, tewksbury, ma) in rpmi-1640 medium with 10% fbs. cells
were allowed to incubate at 37°c and 5% co2 for 2 h. nonadherent
cells were then aspirated, thereby enriching the alveolar macrophage
population. adherent alveolar macrophages were challenged in triplicate with cell culture medium containing 1, 0.5, or 0.25% flavored
e-liquid for 1 h. following e-liquid challenge, opsonized phrodo s.
aureus bioparticles were added to the cells and allowed to incubate as
described above.
to assess whether nicotine altered e-liquid-induced effects on
neutrophil phagocytosis, nicotine (sigma-aldrich) was added to the
kola, hot cinnamon candies, sini-cide, and “pg/vg vehicle” e-liquids at concentrations commonly stocked in vape shops (2.4, 1.8, 1.2,
and 0.6%). nicotine-containing e-liquids were then diluted to 0.25%
in cell culture medium, neutrophils were challenged as described
above, and opsonized phrodo red s. aureus bioparticles were added
to assess phagocytosis.
phagocytosis of bioparticles was quantified using a clariostar
fluorescent microplate reader (bmg labtech, offenburg, germany)
by assessing fluorescence emission at 585 nm. cell-free negative
control wells were used to normalize for background fluorescence
resulting from e-liquid challenge at 1, 0.5, or 0.25%. data are
presented as percent phagocytosis observed in the pg/vg vehicle at
each dilution tested.
dithiothreitol competition assay. alveolar macrophages obtained
from bal fluid were seeded on black clear-bottom 96-well plates and
allowed to incubate as described above. nonadherent cells were
removed, and adherent alveolar macrophages were challenged with
cell culture medium alone, 500 ␮m cinnamaldehyde, 500 ␮m dithiothreitol (dtt; sigma-aldrich), or a combination of 500 ␮m cinnamaldehyde and 500 ␮m dtt for 30 min. following challenge,
opsonized phrodo s. aureus bioparticles were added to the cells and
incubated for an additional 4 h. phagocytosis of bioparticles was
quantified using the clariostar fluorescent microplate reader as
described above.
immunofluorescent analysis of macrophage phagocytosis. alveolar
macrophages were seeded on 13-mm round glass coverslips (0.15 mm
thick) at 2 ⫻ 105 cells/well of a cell culture-treated 24-well plate.
cells were allowed to incubate at 37°c and 5% co2 for 2 h and were
challenged with 1, 0.5, or 0.25% dilutions of flavored e-liquid for 1 h
as described above. opsonized phrodo red s. aureus bioparticles
were added to each well according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and
cells were fixed with 4% pfa after 4 h. following 30 min fixation at
4°c, pfa was aspirated, and cells were blocked for 1 h with 5%
normal donkey serum, 1% gelatin from cold water fish skin, 1%
bovine serum albumin, and 0.05% tween 20 in pbs (block buffer).
alexafluor 488-conjugated phalloidin (thermo fisher scientific) and
hoechst 33342 were diluted in block buffer to the manufacturer’s
recommended concentrations and applied to the cells for 1 h. coverslips were washed with pbs and mounted on microscope slides with
prolong gold antifade mountant, and the edges were sealed with
clear fingernail polish. cells were imaged using a nikon digital
eclipse c-1 modular confocal microscope and plan apo vc 60 ⫻ /
1.40 oil objective.
nk cell killing assay. nk cells (1 ⫻ 105) were added to duplicate
polypropylene flow cytometry tubes with 0.25% e-liquids diluted in

cell culture medium for 1 h. during e-liquid incubation, k-562 human
erythromyeloblastoid leukemia cells (atcc, manassas, va) were
labeled with carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (cayman chemical, ann arbor, mi). following e-liquid challenge, 3.2 ⫻ 104 carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester-labeled k-562 cells were added to
each tube of nk cells and incubated for 4 h at 37°c and 5% co2. the
entire cell suspension was then pelleted, stained with the live/dead
fixable dead cell stain kit (thermo fisher scientific), and fixed with
0.5% pfa, and data were acquired on a bd lsrii flow cytometer as
described in our previous studies (46).
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. supernatants were harvested
from alveolar macrophages and neutrophils after challenge with
diluted e-liquids. specifically, cells collected from bal were seeded
in cell culture-treated 96-well plates as described above. media
containing 1, 0.5, or 0.25% flavored e-liquid or pg/vg vehicle was
added to each well, and supernatants were collected after 24 h.
neutrophils were seeded at a density of 1 ⫻ 105 cells/well of cell
culture-treated 96-well plates in rpmi-1640 media with 0.5% fbs
and stimulated with 1, 0.5, or 0.25% of each e-liquid flavor for 4 h,
followed by collection of supernatants. medias collected postchallenge were stored at ⫺20°c until analyzed. interleukin 8 (il-8) and
interleukin 6 (il-6) were quantified in cell culture supernatants via
commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa)
kits (bd biosciences, san jose, ca).
vaped e-liquid condensate. vaped e-liquid condensates (vec) of
“pg/vg (vehicle control),” kola, hot cinnamon candies, and sinicide were generated as described by olmedo et al. (52). briefly, e-cigarette aerosol was produced by connecting a lavabox dna 200 box
mod (volcano e-cigs, honolulu, hi) and a smok tfv4 mini tank
with a sub-ohm (0.37⍀) tf-clp2 clapton coil (smoktech, shenzhen, china) to a 16-cm length of tubing (4.8 mm id; masterflex l/s
15, vernon hills, il). a peristaltic pump (drive number 07522–20 and
head number 77200 – 62; cole-parmer, vernon hills, il) was used to
pull aerosol from the e-cigarette device at a flow rate of 1 l/min. one
puff of aerosol was generated every 30 s for 10 min (20 puffs total)
using an output setting of 60 watts. vaped aerosol was pumped
through a series of alternating 250-␮l pipette tips and tygon tubing
(1.5 mm id, s3 e-3603; saint-gobain) to allow the aerosol to cool
and condense. vec for each e-liquid was collected in a sterile 1.5-ml
microcentrifuge tube for quantitation of cinnamaldehyde content.
alveolar macrophages and neutrophils were then seeded as described above and challenged with a 0.25% dilution of each vec or
unheated e-liquid to assess whether the vaping process altered e-liquid-induced effects on phagocytic function.
mass spectrometry of e-liquids. qualitative e-liquid analysis was
performed on a bruker scion 456 gas chromatograph (gc)-triple
quadrupole mass spectrometer (bruker, billerica, ma) using an agilent db-5ms capillary column (30 m, 0.25 mm id, 0.25 ␮m film;
agilent technologies, santa clara, ca). samples were prepared by
diluting 100 ␮l of e-liquid in 1 ml of methanol (optima grade) and
vortexing for 30 s. splitless injections (2 ␮l) were performed using a
bruker cp-8400 autosampler.
cinnamaldehyde was quantified in e-liquid and vec samples using
the same gc-mass spectrometry (ms) system and operating conditions. cinnamaldehyde standard solutions were prepared to concentrations of 7.22, 3.61, 1.44, 0.722, 0.361, and 0.181 mm in methanol
(optima grade). a calibration curve was generated using standard
addition methods by diluting the sini-cide, hot cinnamon candies,
and kola e-liquids to ratios of 1:500, 1:100, and 1:10, respectively, in
the standard solutions. dilution factors were selected to ensure that
cinnamaldehyde concentrations fell within the linear range of the
calibration curve. analyses were performed in triplicate. multiplereaction monitoring was used for quantitation of the kola e-liquid,
since it provided the limit of detection needed for the lower cinnamaldehyde concentration. two reactions were used: mass-to-charge
ratio (m/z) 131–77 and m/z 131–103. the m/z 77 product ion was used
for quantitation with 90% of the scan time, and the m/z 103 product

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

ion was used for qualification with 10% of the scan time to provide
increased selectivity. argon was used as the collision gas at a pressure
of 1.5 mtorr, and the collision energy was 20 ev.
the gc oven was programmed to hold the temperature at 50°c for
2 min, ramp to 300°c at a rate of 15°c/min, and hold at 300°c for
6.33 min for a total run time of 25 min. the transfer line and electron
ionization source were held at 250°c throughout the analysis. compound identification and peak integration were done using amdis
gc/ms analysis software based on spectral matching with the nist
mass spectral library (2011).
statistics. data were generated from cells isolated from a minimum
of n ⫽ 3 individuals, as noted the legends for figs. 1– 8. when
appropriate, data are expressed as a percentage of pg/vg vehicle
control. macrophage and neutrophil data were analyzed using a
two-way anova with fisher’s least-significant difference posttest.
nk cell-mediated cytotoxicity data were analyzed using a one-way
anova with a dunn’s multiple-comparison test. all statistical tests
were performed using graphpad prism version 7. a p value of ⬍0.05
was considered to be significant.
results

effects of flavored e-liquids on alveolar macrophages. the
effects of flavored e-liquids on alveolar macrophage phagocytosis were assessed by challenging cells with 1, 0.5, and 0.25%
e-liquids diluted in cell culture medium, followed by incubation with s. aureus bioparticles. the bioparticles used for this
study emit a minimal fluorescent signal at physiological ph

l281

(~7.4); however, fluorescence intensity increases as particles
are phagocytosed and subjected to an acidic ph in phagosomes. exposure of alveolar macrophages to the highest dilution (1%) of pg/vg vehicle alone produced a slight but
significant reduction in bioparticle phagocytosis (fig. 1a). of
the seven e-liquids tested, only kola (1%) and sini-cide (1, 0.5,
and 0.25%) significantly suppressed phagocytosis compared
with the pg/vg vehicle control (fig. 1b). fluorescent confocal
microscopic analysis of macrophages challenged with 0.25%
sini-cide revealed normal alveolar macrophage morphology
but loss of phagocytic function and inability to engulf labeled
bioparticles (fig. 1c). the suppression of macrophage phagocytosis induced by sini-cide was validated by flow cytometry.
flow analysis confirmed that sini-cide at all three dilutions
used (1, 0.5, and 0.25%) significantly reduced phagocytic
function (fig. 1d). the reduction in phagocytosis observed
with the 1% sini-cide challenge can be attributed to e-liquidinduced cytotoxicity; however, the 0.5 and 0.25% dilutions
significantly suppressed phagocytosis without reducing macrophage viability (fig. 1e).
in addition to changes in phagocytic function, e-liquidinduced alterations in alveolar macrophage proinflammatory
cytokine production were evaluated. acute exposure to 1%
kola e-liquid significantly increased il-6 secretion, whereas
0.5% sini-cide challenge significantly suppressed il-6 secre-

fig. 1. effects of flavored e-liquids on alveolar macrophage phagocytosis. alveolar macrophages were challenged with 1, 0.5, and 0.25% dilutions of propylene
glycol/vegetable glycerin (pg/vg) vehicle (a) or electronic cigarette liquids (e-liquids, b) for 1 h before the addition of staphylococcus aureus bioparticles.
phagocytosis was assessed 4 h after the addition of bioparticles (n ⫽ 10 experiments). c: fluorescent confocal microscopy of alveolar macrophages challenged
with pg/vg vehicle (left) or “sini-cide” e-liquid (0.25%, right). white arrows, nonphagocytosed and extracellular bioparticles. d: e-liquid-induced suppression
of phagocytosis was validated by flow cytometry (n ⫽ 3). e: flow-based analysis of cell viability (n ⫽ 3). data are presented as means ⫾ se. significance: **p ⬍
0.01 and ***p ⬍ 0.001 compared with vehicle control.
ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

l282

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

fig. 2. effects of flavored e-liquids on alveolar macrophage cytokine secretion. alveolar macrophages were challenged with 1,
0.5, and 0.25% e-liquid dilutions for 24 h
and evaluated for changes in interleukin
(il)-6 (a) and il-8 (b) protein secretion
(n ⫽ 5). data are presented as means ⫾ se.
significance: *p ⬍ 0.05 and ***p ⬍ 0.001
compared with vehicle control.

tion relative to the pg/vg vehicle control (fig. 2a). sini-cide
e-liquid significantly suppressed alveolar macrophage il-8
secretion across all dilutions tested (fig. 2b).
effects of flavored e-liquids on neutrophils. we next determined the effects of flavored e-liquids on the phagocytic
capacity of human primary neutrophils. similar to the effect on
alveolar macrophages, challenge with the 1% dilution pg/vg
vehicle alone significantly reduced neutrophil phagocytosis
(fig. 3a). of the seven flavored e-liquids tested, hot cinnamon
candies, banana pudding, menthol tobacco, banana, and
sini-cide reduced neutrophil phagocytosis across all dilutions
in a dose-dependent manner (fig. 3b). although toxicity was
observed at higher concentrations for kola (1%) and sini-cide
(1 and 0.5%) flavors, none of the flavors showed significant
toxicity at 0.25%, suggesting that suppression of phagocytosis
was not the result of e-liquid-induced cytotoxicity (lactate
dehydrogenase release assay; data not shown). interestingly,
sini-cide challenge resulted in a dose-dependent change in
neutrophil phagocytosis that was opposite of that observed

in the other e-liquids. we observed that bioparticle fluorescence intensity (i.e., phagocytosis) increased as the percent
sini-cide challenge increased; however, this is likely because of cell lysis, which we only observed with the 0.5 and
1.0% sini-cide challenges. furthermore, fluorescent confocal microscopic analysis of neutrophils challenged with
0.25% hot cinnamon candies and sini-cide revealed normal neutrophil morphology but an inability to engulf labeled
bioparticles (fig. 3c).
we next investigated whether neutrophils exposed to
flavored e-liquids exhibited altered proinflammatory cytokine production. all flavored e-liquids, with the exception
of solid menthol and sini-cide, induced a significant increase in neutrophil il-8 secretion (fig. 3d). specifically,
kola (1 and 0.5%), hot cinnamon candies (0.5%), banana
pudding (1, 0.5, and 0.25%), menthol tobacco (1%), and
banana (1%) significantly increased il-8 production relative to the pg/vg vehicle control. the sini-cide e-liquid did
not stimulate il-8 secretion; however, this is likely because

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

l283

fig. 3. effects of flavored e-liquids on neutrophil phagocytosis. neutrophils were challenged with 1, 0.5, and 0.25% dilutions of pg/vg vehicle (a) or e-liquids
(b) for 30 min before addition of s. aureus bioparticles. phagocytosis was assessed 4 h after the addition of bioparticles (n ⫽ 5). c: fluorescent confocal
microscopy of neutrophils challenged with 0.25% “kola,” “hot cinnamon candies,” and sini-cide. d: neutrophils were challenged with 1, 0.5, and 0.25%
e-liquid dilutions for 4 h and evaluated for changes in il-8 secretion (n ⫽ 3). data are presented as means ⫾ se. significance: *p ⬍ 0.05, **p ⬍ 0.01, and
***p ⬍ 0.001 compared with vehicle control.

of the significant cytotoxicity observed with the 1 and 0.5%
challenges.
in addition to phagocytosis, neutrophils exert their antibacterial function via the formation of nets. to assess the
impact of e-liquids on net generation, primary human neutrophils were incubated with 1% e-liquids diluted in cell
culture medium alone or in the presence of 25 nm pma, a
pkc agonist and potent activator of net formation. challenge
of neutrophils with a 1% dilution of pg/vg with and without
25 nm pma did not induce or alter net formation compared
with net formation generated with media alone and media
with 25 nm pma (fig. 4a). similar to pg/vg, e-liquid
challenges without the addition of pma did not stimulate
normal net formation; however, 1% sini-cide induced chromatin release at all time points (fig. 4b). the pattern of
chromatin extrusion observed with the sini-cide challenge did
not follow the oxidant-driven temporal progression of net

formation (13, 19) or the rapid oxidant-independent generation
of nets (54), suggesting e-liquid-induced cytotoxicity and cell
lysis. to assess whether flavored e-liquids alter normal net
formation, neutrophils were challenged with 1% e-liquid dilutions containing 25 nm pma, and net extrusion was quantified over 4 h. stimulation of neutrophils with 1% kola significantly enhanced chromatin release at 3 h, whereas challenge
with 1% hot cinnamon candies suppressed pma-induced
net formation at 4 h (fig. 4c). exposure to 1% sini-cide
resulted in a similar pattern of chromatin release observed in
the challenge without pma. to visualize the time-dependent
effects of these e-liquids on net formation, we fixed neutrophils at the various time points and examined cellular morphology and markers of net formation, such as disintegration
of nuclear membranes, nuclear material filling the cytoplasm
and mixing with cellular granules, and complete loss of nuclear
and granular integrity (12) using confocal microscopy. figure

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

l284

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

fig. 4. effects of flavored e-liquids on neutrophil extracellular trap (net) formation. quantitation of nucleic acid released during challenge with a 1% dilution
of pg/vg vehicle (a) or e-liquid challenges with 25 nm phorbol 12-myristate,13-acetate (pma, b) and without 25 nm pma (c) (n ⫽ 3). d: confocal
immunofluorescence microscopy of neutrophils challenged with 1% flavored e-liquids, with and without 25 nm pma. data are presented as means ⫾ se.
significance: *p ⬍ 0.05 and *** p ⬍ 0.001 compared with vehicle control.

4d indicates that sini-cide was cytotoxic, resulting in chromatin release by cell lysis within the 1st h of exposure, confirming
the nonspecific release of dna seen in fig. 4, b and c.
interestingly, stimulation with kola in the presence of pma
appeared to expedite the steps associated with net formation,
with complete loss of nuclear and granular integrity seen at 3 h,
rather than 4 h. in addition, stimulation with hot cinnamon
candies appeared to block progression of net formation.
these data suggest that stimulation with kola and hot cinnamon candies has differential effects on net formation. furthermore, the visual illustration in fig. 4d largely reflects the
quantitative assessment of chromatin release reported in fig. 4,
b and c.
numerous studies have reported that nicotine elicits a variety of immune suppressive responses (31, 58, 59) and prolongs
neutrophil survival (3, 43, 70). to investigate whether nicotine
could alter the observed e-liquid-induced suppression of neutrophil phagocytosis, we added nicotine to the pg/vg vehicle,
kola, hot cinnamon candies, and sini-cide e-liquids at concentrations commonly found in commercially available e-liquids (0.6, 1.2, 1.8, and 2.4 mg/ml). stimulation with a 0.25%

dilution of e-liquids with and without nicotine did not significantly affect neutrophil phagocytosis beyond the effects observed with the different flavored e-liquids alone (fig. 5a). in
addition, emerging evidence indicates that thermal decomposition of e-liquids during the vaping process can modify the
chemical composition of the aerosol mixtures (35). to examine
whether and how aerosolization of e-liquids affects the suppressive effects on neutrophil phagocytosis, we prepared vec,
similar to previously published methods (52). figure 5b shows
that stimulation of neutrophils with pg/vg vehicle, kola, hot
cinnamon candies, or sini-cide vec did not significantly alter
neutrophil phagocytosis compared with the unheated e-liquid
challenges. these data suggest that vaping and aerosolization
of these e-liquids do not significantly modify the ability to
suppress neutrophil phagocytosis.
effects of flavored e-liquids on nk cells. to evaluate the
impact of flavored e-liquids on normal nk cell function, we
exposed nk cells to flavored e-liquids in cell culture medium
before incubation with fluorescently labeled k562 leukemia
target cells. based on the previous results in macrophages and
neutrophils, we focused our analysis on the 0.25% e-liquid

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

l285

fig. 5. effects of nicotine and vaping on e-liquid-induced changes in neutrophil phagocytosis. nicotine was added to the kola, hot cinnamon candies, sini-cide,
and pg/vg vehicle e-liquids at concentrations commonly stocked in vape shops (2.4, 1.8, 1.2, and 0.6%). a: nicotine-containing e-liquids were diluted to 0.25%
in cell culture medium, and neutrophils were challenged for 30 min before the addition of s. aureus bioparticles. phagocytosis was assessed 4 h after the addition
of bioparticles (n ⫽ 4). b: kola, hot cinnamon candies, sini-cide, and “pg/vg” e-liquids were “vaped” to generate vaped e-liquid condensates (vecs).
neutrophils were challenged with 0.25% dilutions of kola, hot cinnamon candies, sini-cide, and pg/vg e-liquids or vecs for 30 min before the addition of
s. aureus bioparticles. phagocytosis was assessed 4 h after the addition of bioparticles (n ⫽ 3). data are presented as means ⫾ se. significance: **p ⬍ 0.01
and ***p ⬍ 0.001 compared with vehicle control.

dilution. following 4 h incubation, the ability of the nk cells
to eliminate target cells was determined using flow cytometry
(fig. 6a). killing of target cells was suppressed by cinnamonflavored e-liquids. specifically, 0.25% hot cinnamon candies
and 0.25% sini-cide reduced the killing efficiency of nk cells
compared with the pg/vg vehicle control (fig. 6, a and b).
reductions in nk cell killing capacity were not the result of a
loss of nk cell viability (data not shown).

chemical composition of flavored e-liquids. gc-coupled ms
was used to determine the qualitative chemical composition of
the seven flavored e-liquids used for this study. spiro[1,3dioxolane-2,2=(1=h)-naphthalene]-, 3=,4=-dihydro-, vinyl transcinnamate, and cinnamaldehyde were present in the kola, hot
cinnamon candies, and sini-cide flavored e-liquids [table s1
(supplemental data for this article is available on the journal
website.)]. quantitative ms analysis for cinnamaldehyde con-

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

l286

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

fig. 6. effects of flavored e-liquids on natural killer (nk) cell-mediated cytotoxicity. nk cells were incubated for 1 h with 0.25% e-liquids and then combined
with carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (cfse)-labeled k562 target cells for 4 h. a: flow cytometry analysis of cfse bright target cells counter-labeled with
a far-red live/dead indicator. b: quantitation of nk cell-mediated killing of k562 leukemia target cells (n ⫽ 5). data are presented as means ⫾ se. significance:
*p ⬍ 0.05 compared with vehicle control.

tent in these flavored e-liquids revealed that the kola, hot
cinnamon candies, and sini-cide contained 0.896 ⫾ 0.360,
39.328 ⫾ 3.414, and 1,131.0 ⫾ 19.9 mm, respectively (table
1). based on these measured concentration of cinnamaldehyde
in the neat e-liquids, we extrapolated the concentrations of
cinnamaldehyde in the 1, 0.5, and 0.25% dilutions of kola, hot
cinnamon candies, and sini-cide used to challenge cells. in
addition, we determined whether aerosolization of these e-liquids modified the cinnamaldehyde content. as shown in table
1, cinnamaldehyde was present in the vec derived from kola,
hot cinnamon candies, and sini-cide, but at lower concentrations, likely reflecting wall loss caused by the system generating the condensate.
effects of cinnamaldehyde on alveolar macrophage, neutrophil, and nk cell function. ms analysis revealed that cinnamaldehyde was a major flavoring component in sini-cide, hot

cinnamon candies, and kola, and each of these e-liquids
impaired normal immune cell function in our study. to determine the specific contribution of cinnamaldehyde to the observed immunosuppressive effects, we challenged alveolar
macrophages, neutrophils, and nk cells with various doses of
cinnamaldehyde diluted in cell culture medium and assessed
changes in functional end points. alveolar macrophages were
incubated with cinnamaldehyde for 1 h before the addition of
s. aureus bioparticles. changes in phagocytosis were assessed
after 4 h. a significant reduction in phagocytosis was observed
with cinnamaldehyde concentrations ⱖ312.5 ␮m, whereas
cinnamaldehyde-induced cell death was only apparent at the 10
mm concentration (fig. 7a). similarly, neutrophils were challenged for 30 min with a broad range of cinnamaldehyde
concentrations, and phagocytosis of bioparticles was assessed.
neutrophil phagocytosis was significantly inhibited at cinna-

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

table 1. quantitation of cinnamaldehyde in e-liquids
and vaped e-liquid condensates
kola

neat e-liquid, mm
0.896 ⫾ 0.360
dilution, mm
1%†
0.00896
0.5%†
0.00448
0.25%†
0.00224
vaped e-liquid
0.742 ⫾ 0.035
condensate, mm

hot cinnamon candies

sini-cide

39.32 ⫾ 3.41

1,131 ⫾ 19.9

0.393
0.197
0.0983
9.807 ⫾ 0.743

11.31*
5.66*
2.83*
183.9 ⫾ 4.089

values are means ⫾ sd. *units are mm. †cinnamaldehyde in e-liquid
dilutions is extrapolated from neat e-liquid measurements.

maldehyde concentrations of 10 ␮m and greater. viability was
significantly reduced with 5 and 10 mm cinnamaldehyde
exposures (fig. 7b). to assess the direct effects of cinnamaldehyde on nk cell killing of target leukemia cells, nk cells
were challenged with a broad range of cinnamaldehyde concentrations for 1 h before incubation with fluorescently labeled
k562 target cells. flow cytometry analysis revealed that nk
cell killing efficiency was significantly reduced with cinnamaldehyde challenges between 78 ␮m and 1 mm. exposure of
target cells to cinnamaldehyde concentrations ⬎1.25 mm resulted in significant cell death independent of nk cell activity.
cinnamaldehyde significantly reduced nk cell viability at
concentrations of 625 ␮m and greater (fig. 7c). the inhibitory
(ic50) and cytotoxic (lc50) concentrations for cinnamaldehyde
on each end point in the respective cell type tested are reported
in table 2.
cinnamaldehyde is a potent electrophile that likely reacts
with free sulfhydryl groups on cysteine residues on proteins
(41). however, it is unclear whether the sulfhydryl-modifying
activity of cinnamaldehyde contributes to the observed suppression of immune cell function. to investigate this potential
mechanism, we conducted competition experiments using the
small-molecule reducing agent dtt. cinnamaldehyde-mediated suppression of alveolar macrophage phagocytosis was
reversed by coexposure with cinnamaldehyde and dtt (fig.
8), suggesting protein thiol modification as a potential mechanism for cinnamaldehyde-induced immune cell dysfunction.
discussion

vaping e-cigarettes is frequently viewed as a safer alternative to cigarette smoking based on studies that have reported
substantially lower levels of known toxicants and carcinogens
commonly found in cigarette smoke (16, 24, 44, 66). recent
publications have highlighted the potential risk for exposure to
reactive chemicals (1, 6, 9, 22, 60, 63) and toxicants (21, 35,
69), such as flavoring agents, not present in traditional cigarette
smoke. furthermore, we recently demonstrated that vaping
e-cigarettes is associated with decreased expression of immune
genes in the nasal mucosa of human volunteers (42). however,
the manner by which these genomic alterations may affect
respiratory immune responses is not known. in the present
study, we evaluated the effects of seven flavored e-liquids on
respiratory innate immune cell function by exposing human
alveolar macrophages, neutrophils, and nk cells to varying
dilutions of e-liquid and vec. in addition to identifying
flavor-specific and dose-dependent decreases in functional end
points across all three human primary immune cell types, our

l287

data demonstrate that cinnamaldehyde-containing e-liquids
had the most immunosuppressive effects across the different
end points and cell types examined. exposure of alveolar
macrophages, neutrophils, and nk cells to a broad range of
cinnamaldehyde spanning seven orders of magnitude established a dose-response relationship for cinnamaldehyde-induced suppression of human immune cell function, supporting
a direct cause-and-effect relationship between exposure to
cinnamaldehyde-containing e-liquids and suppression of respiratory immune cell function. furthermore, addition of the thiol
reducing agent dtt inhibited the effects of cinnamaldehyde on
alveolar macrophages, suggesting cinnamaldehyde-induced
thiolation as a potential mechanism mediating the observed
immune suppressive effects.
cinnamon-flavored e-liquids are popular among e-cigarette
users and are often identified as “best sellers” by online
e-liquid retailers. however, some users have reported mouth,
throat, and respiratory irritation after vaping some cinnamon
e-liquids (8), and strong cinnamon-flavored e-liquids have
been reported to erode plastic tanks used on many secondgeneration vaporizers (https://www.reddit.com/r/electronic_
cigarette/comments/1bnuo7/why_do_some_eliquids_crack_
plastic_tanks/). several recent studies have illustrated the potential for cinnamaldehyde to cause harm in the context of
e-cigarette and e-liquid exposures. behar et al. evaluated the
effects of eight cinnamon-flavored refill fluids on human embryonic stem cells and human adult pulmonary fibroblasts and
found that most of the e-liquids tested were cytotoxic (8).
furthermore, they specifically attributed the observed e-liquidinduced cytotoxicity to cinnamaldehyde and 2-methoxycinnamaldehyde. more recently, lerner et al. showed that human
lung fibroblasts exhibited cellular stress responses, morphological changes, increased il-8 secretion, and ultimately cell death
in response to challenge with a cinnamon-flavored e-liquid
(40). our data reveal that both cinnamon-flavored e-liquids and
cinnamaldehyde suppress immune cell function in each cell
type tested in a dose-dependent manner at concentrations
below levels causing cytotoxicity (table 2). thus, our data
establish a direct link between a specific flavoring chemical
used in e-liquids and suppression of respiratory immune cell
function.
innate immune cells of the respiratory system, which consist
predominately of alveolar and airway macrophages, neutrophils in the perialveolar vasculature, and nk cells in the nasal
passages and sinuses (30), play an essential role in eliminating
inhaled pathogens and damaged host cells to prevent infection
and injury. toxicants that impair the innate immune functions
of these cell types, by either aberrant activation or suppression,
would therefore disrupt respiratory immune system homeostasis and increase potential susceptibility to respiratory infections. hwang et al. recently reported that e-cigarette vapor
extract reduced both macrophage and neutrophil antimicrobial
activity against s. aureus (31). however, the effect was attributed to nicotine, pg, and glycerin rather than specific flavoring
agents. we report here that acute exposure of human alveolar
macrophages and neutrophils to various flavored e-liquids
reduced phagocytosis of s. aureus; however, the impaired
clearance we observed was flavor specific, with phagocytosis
being suppressed more broadly in neutrophils (figs. 1 and 3).
moreover, the addition of nicotine to our e-liquid challenges
did not significantly alter the suppression of phagocytosis

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

l288

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

fig. 7. effects of cinnamaldehyde on alveolar macrophage, neutrophil, and nk cell
function. alveolar macrophages (a) (n ⫽ 3)
and neutrophils (b) (n ⫽ 3) were challenged
with a broad range of cinnamaldehyde concentrations. cinnamaldehyde-induced changes in
bioparticle phagocytosis and cell viability
were evaluated by flow cytometry. c: nk cells
(n ⫽ 3) were challenged with a broad range of
cinnamaldehyde concentrations, and changes
in cell-mediated killing of k562 leukemia cells
and nk cell viability were quantified using
flow cytometry. data are presented as means ⫾
se. extrapolated e-liquid concentrations of
cinnamaldehyde for each dilution tested (1, 0.5,
and 0.25%) are indicated within each panel.

observed with exposure to nicotine-free e-liquids (fig. 5).
although nicotine, at sufficient concentrations, may independently suppress innate immune cell activation and impair the
clearance of s. aureus, our data illustrate that chemical flavorings likely contribute to the suppression of key respiratory
immune cell functions. indeed, previous work by kim et al.
found that cinnamaldehyde alters immune responses in monocyte and macrophage cell lines by thiolation of target cysteine

residues, supporting the notion that a more direct mode of
action, such as protein modification, mediates the cinnamaldehyde-induced suppression of macrophage immune function
(36). to investigate whether the sulfhydryl-modifying activity
of cinnamaldehyde mediates suppression of respiratory innate
immune cell function, we conducted competition experiments
using the small-molecule reducing agent dtt. the observed
cinnamaldehyde-mediated suppression of alveolar macrophage

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

table 2. the inhibitory and cytotoxic potential of
cinnamaldehyde on human primary alveolar macrophages,
neutrophils, and nk cells
ic50, mm
lc50, mm

alveolar macrophages

neutrophils

nk cells

0.243 ⫾ 0.0593
6.984 ⫾ 0.942

0.0324 ⫾ 0.0129
3.352 ⫾ 0.838

0.0205 ⫾ 0.0054
3.133 ⫾ 0.732

values are means ⫾ sd. nk, natural killer; ic50, half-maximal inhibitory
concentration; lc50, half-maximal cytotoxic concentration.

phagocytosis was reversed by coexposure with dtt, suggesting that the sulfhydryl-modifying activity of cinnamaldehyde
correlates with cinnamaldehyde-induced reductions in phagocytic capacity (fig. 8). although these data strongly suggest
that interactions between cinnamaldehyde and susceptible nucleophilic residues of proteins are driving cinnamaldehydemediated impairments of immune cell function, further work is
needed to determine which proteins are adducted and which
cellular pathways are affected.
neutrophils play an essential role in protecting the airways
from bacterial infection by common inhaled pathogens, including streptococcus pneumoniae (20), klebsiella pneumoniae
(33), legionella pneumophila (65), and s. aureus (48). in
healthy individuals, phagocytosis of bacterial pathogens stimulates the production of reactive oxygen species (ros), which
in turn facilitates the release of microbicide granule components into phagosomes. tobacco smoke impairs respiratory
burst activation and thereby compromises the antibacterial
function of neutrophils (49). furthermore, recent studies of
neutrophil function (including cell migration, ros generation,
degranulation, phagocytosis, and net generation) in copd
patients indicate impaired responses that predispose toward
reduced bacterial clearance and increased inflammation (62).
acrolein, an ␣,␤-unsaturated aldehyde found in cigarette
smoke, impairs neutrophil function by depleting glutathione
levels and suppressing nadph oxidase activity by the direct
alkylation of cysteine residues in proteins involved in nadph
oxidase activation (49). although levels of acrolein in e-liquids
and e-cigarette aerosols are reported to be substantially lower
than those present in cigarette smoke (24), ␣,␤-unsaturated
aldehyde flavorings, such as cinnamaldehyde, may impair
neutrophil function by a similar mechanism. our results indicate that cinnamaldehyde-containing e-liquids suppress neutrophil phagocytosis of s. aureus in a dose-dependent manner
(fig. 3, a and b), and subsequent challenge with cinnamaldehyde alone recapitulated the effect (fig. 7b). moreover, cinnamaldehyde-induced inhibition of phagocytosis was observed
at low micromolar concentrations (ic50 ⫽ 32.4 ⫾ 12.9 ␮m),
more than two orders of magnitude lower than those eliciting
cytotoxicity (lc50 ⫽ 3.35 ⫾ 0.84 mm) (table 2).
neutrophils also eliminate bacterial pathogens by expelling
extracellular traps composed of chromatin and antimicrobial
peptides originating from intracellular vesicles (11, 19, 62).
net formation is initiated by stimulation of surface receptors,
including toll-like receptors, cytokine receptors, and fragment
crystallizable receptors, resulting in activation of pkc and the
nadph oxidase complex (26, 62). whereas the exact role
of nets in respiratory disease remains unclear, accumulation
of nets has been implicated in the pathogenesis of numerous
noninfectious diseases, inflammatory disorders, and autoim-

l289

mune disorders, including cystic fibrosis, asthma, and copd
(27). less is known about the consequences of impaired net
formation; however, the developmental syndrome of neonatal
neutrophil dysfunction is characterized by compromised net
generation and increases susceptibility for neonatal septicemia
and other infectious complications in human neonates (71).
our finding that 1% kola (8.96 ␮m cinnamaldehyde) significantly increased the rate of pma-induced net formation,
whereas 1% hot cinnamon candies (393.28 ␮m cinnamaldehyde) significantly decreased the rate of pma-induced net
formation, suggests that cinnamaldehyde may elicit a concentration-dependent bimodal response (fig. 4). aberrant net
activation, such as we observed during the 1% kola e-liquid
exposure, may increase net-mediated tissue damage and
respiratory dysfunction. alternatively, inhibition of net formation, such as we observed with exposure to the 1% dilution
of hot cinnamon candies e-liquid, may allow for enhanced
dissemination of bacterial pathogens in the lungs and increase
the risk of respiratory infections.
nk cells are a subset of cytotoxic lymphocytes that serve as
sentinels of the immune system by recognizing and killing
virus-infected and tumor cells. unlike other lymphocytes, nk
cells do not require previous sensitization to recognize compromised cells; rather, they use activating and inhibiting receptors to interrogate host cells for molecular changes indicative of damage or infection (68). nk cells lyse host cells
presenting abnormal surface antigens via exocytosis of cytotoxic perforin and granzymes. studies indicate that smoking is
associated with reduced numbers of circulating nk cells (67),
and cigarette smoke reduces nk cell-mediated killing of cancer cells in vitro (17). furthermore, our group reported that nk
cells are a major immune cell type in human nasal passages,
and influenza-induced cytotoxic nk cell responses are suppressed in smokers (30). here, we expanded on the current
literature by evaluating the effects of flavored e-liquids and
cinnamaldehyde flavoring on nk cell function. our data indic-

fig. 8. coexposure of alveolar macrophages with cinnamaldehyde and dtt
reverses cinnamaldehyde-induced suppression of phagocytosis. alveolar macrophages were challenged with cell culture medium, 500 ␮m dtt, 500 ␮m
cinnamaldehyde, or 500 ␮m dtt and 500 ␮m cinnamaldehyde, and changes
in bioparticle phagocytosis were evaluated (n ⫽ 3). data are presented as
means ⫾ se.

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

l290

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

ate that exposure of nk cells to 0.25% dilutions of two
cinnamon-flavored e-liquids in our panel suppressed nk cell
cytotoxic function, as measured by the ability to kill leukemia
target cells (fig. 5). exposure to cinnamaldehyde alone recapitulated this effect, inhibiting nk cell killing at low micromolar concentrations (ic50 ⫽ 20.5 ⫾ 5.4 ␮m) (fig. 7 and
table 2). to our knowledge, we are the first to report that
flavored e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde, a common flavoring
agent, can suppress nk cell-mediated killing of target cells,
which could have implications for their ability to kill both
tumorigenic and virus-infected host cells.
flavoring agents, which were banned from use in traditional
cigarettes by the fda in 2009, are broadly used in the manufacture of e-cigarettes and refill e-liquids (73) and contribute to
the surging popularity of these products (15). a precedent for
food-safe chemical flavorings causing inhalational injury was
established in may 2000 when eight workers at a microwave
popcorn-processing facility developed bronchiolitis obliterans,
an irreversible obstructive disease of the bronchioles, as a
result of exposure to the aerosolized butter flavoring diacetyl
(39). a recent study published by allen et al. screened 51
unique flavored e-liquids for the presence of diacetyl, acetoin,
and 2,3-pentanedione (1) and revealed that 47 of 51 e-liquids
contained at least one of the potentially hazardous butterflavoring chemicals. in addition to the butter flavorings, recent
in vitro studies report that the cytotoxic effects of e-liquids
were largely the result of chemical flavorings (7, 25). bahl el
al. evaluated the cytotoxicity of 41 e-liquids on human pulmonary fibroblasts, human embryonic stem cells, and mouse
neural stem cells. they report that cytotoxicity varied by
product; however, cytotoxicity did not result from nicotine
exposure but rather correlated with the number and concentration of chemicals used to flavor fluids (5). more recently,
gerloff et al. evaluated lung epithelial cell and fibroblast
inflammatory responses following exposure to various e-cigarette flavoring chemicals. their data indicate that ortho-vanillin, acetoin, and maltol stimulate proinflammatory cytokine
(il-8) secretion in lung epithelial cells and fibroblasts. furthermore, the authors report that exposure of airway epithelial cells
to diacetyl, coumarin, acetoin, maltol, and cinnamaldehyde
resulted in a significant and persistent loss of epithelial barrier
function (22). taken together, previous reports and our data
shown here demonstrate a clear dose-response relationship
between levels of cinnamaldehyde occurring in commercially
available e-liquids and suppressed function of human respiratory immune cells. these findings add to the concern that
flavored e-liquids may broadly contain potentially hazardous
chemicals and illustrate the need to investigate the respiratory
effects of common flavorings used in the manufacture of
e-liquids.
acknowledgments
we thank bethany bradford, carole robinette, susan jones, and martha
almond for the recruitment, scheduling, and collection of samples from
volunteer research subjects and dr. andy ghio and joleen soukup for
providing alveolar macrophages. we also thank dr. claire doerschuk for
contributing expertise in analytical methods for evaluating neutrophil function.
present address of e. a. pawlak: nanostring technologies, inc., seattle, wa.
present address of s. l. reeber: thermo fisher scientific, san jose, ca.

grants
this work was supported by national institutes of health (nih) grants
t32-es-007126 and p50-hl-120100. research reported in this publication
was in part supported by the nih and the food and drug administration
center for tobacco products.
disclaimers
the content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not
necessarily represent the official views of the national institutes of health or
the food and drug administration.
disclosures
no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the authors.
author contributions
p.w.c., e.a.p., s.l.r., g.l.g., and i.j. conceived and designed research;
p.w.c., e.a.p., j.t.l., j.e.k., and s.l.r. performed experiments; p.w.c.,
e.a.p., s.l.r., g.l.g., and i.j. analyzed data; p.w.c., e.a.p., and i.j.
interpreted results of experiments; p.w.c. and e.a.p. prepared figures; p.w.c.
and i.j. drafted manuscript; p.w.c., e.a.p., j.t.l., j.e.k., s.l.r., g.l.g., and
i.j. edited and revised manuscript; p.w.c., e.a.p., j.t.l., j.e.k., s.l.r.,
g.l.g., and i.j. approved final version of manuscript.
references
1. allen jg, flanigan ss, leblanc m, vallarino j, macnaughton p,
stewart jh, christiani dc. flavoring chemicals in e-cigarettes: diacetyl,
2,3-pentanedione, and acetoin in a sample of 51 products, including fruit-,
candy-, and cocktail-flavored e-cigarettes. environ health perspect 124:
733–739, 2016. doi:10.1289/ehp348.
2. amrock sm, zakhar j, zhou s, weitzman m. perception of e-cigarette
harm and its correlation with use among u.s. adolescents. nicotine tob
res 17: 330 –336, 2015. doi:10.1093/ntr/ntu156.
3. aoshiba k, nagai a, yasui s, konno k. nicotine prolongs neutrophil
survival by suppressing apoptosis. j lab clin med 127: 186 –194, 1996.
doi:10.1016/s0022-2143(96)90077-3.
4. arrazola ra, singh t, corey cg, husten cg, neff lj, apelberg bj,
bunnell re, choiniere cj, king ba, cox s, mcafee t, caraballo rs;
centers for disease control and prevention (cdc). tobacco use
among middle and high school students—united states, 2011–2014.
mmwr morb mortal wkly rep 64: 381–385, 2015.
5. bahl v, lin s, xu n, davis b, wang yh, talbot p. comparison of
electronic cigarette refill fluid cytotoxicity using embryonic and adult
models. reprod toxicol 34: 529 –537, 2012. doi:10.1016/j.reprotox.2012.
08.001.
6. bansal v, kim kh. review on quantitation methods for hazardous
pollutants released by e-cigarette (ec) smoking. trends anal chem 78:
120 –133, 2016. doi:10.1016/j.trac.2016.02.015.
7. barrington-trimis jl, samet jm, mcconnell r. flavorings in electronic cigarettes: an unrecognized respiratory health hazard? jama 312:
2493–2494, 2014. doi:10.1001/jama.2014.14830.
8. behar rz, davis b, wang y, bahl v, lin s, talbot p. identification of
toxicants in cinnamon-flavored electronic cigarette refill fluids. toxicol in
vitro 28: 198 –208, 2014. doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2013.10.006.
9. behar rz, luo w, lin sc, wang y, valle j, pankow jf, talbot p.
distribution, quantification and toxicity of cinnamaldehyde in electronic
cigarette refill fluids and aerosols. tob control 25, suppl 2: ii94 –ii102,
2016. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2016-053224..
10. brinkmann v, laube b, abed ua, goosmann c, zychlinsky a.
neutrophil extracellular traps: how to generate and visualize them. j vis
exp pii: 1724, 2010. doi:10.3791/1724.
11. brinkmann v, reichard u, goosmann c, fauler b, uhlemann y,
weiss ds, weinrauch y, zychlinsky a. neutrophil extracellular traps
kill bacteria. science 303: 1532–1535, 2004. doi:10.1126/science.
1092385.
12. brinkmann v, zychlinsky a. beneficial suicide: why neutrophils die
to make nets. nat rev microbiol 5: 577–582, 2007. doi:10.1038/
nrmicro1710.
13. brinkmann v, zychlinsky a. neutrophil extracellular traps: is immunity
the second function of chromatin? j cell biol 198: 773–783, 2012.
doi:10.1083/jcb.201203170.

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells
14. chao lk, hua kf, hsu hy, cheng ss, lin if, chen cj, chen st,
chang st. cinnamaldehyde inhibits pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion from monocytes/macrophages through suppression of intracellular
signaling. food chem toxicol 46: 220 –231, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.fct.2007.
07.016.
15. farsalinos ke, romagna g, tsiapras d, kyrzopoulos s, spyrou a,
voudris v. impact of flavour variability on electronic cigarette use
experience: an internet survey. int j environ res public health 10:
7272–7282, 2013. doi:10.3390/ijerph10127272.
16. farsalinos ke, voudris v, poulas k. e-cigarettes generate high levels of
aldehydes only in ‘dry puff’ conditions. addiction 110: 1352–1356, 2015.
doi:10.1111/add.12942.
17. ferson m, edwards a, lind a, milton gw, hersey p. low natural
killer-cell activity and immunoglobulin levels associated with smoking in
human subjects. int j cancer 23: 603–609, 1979. doi:10.1002/ijc.
2910230504.
18. finkelstein ei, ruben j, koot cw, hristova m, van der vliet a.
regulation of constitutive neutrophil apoptosis by the ␣,␤-unsaturated
aldehydes acrolein and 4-hydroxynonenal. am j physiol lung cell mol
physiol 289: l1019 –l1028, 2005. doi:10.1152/ajplung.00227.2005.
18a.flavor and extract manufacturing association of the united states.
respiratory health and safety in the flavor manufacturing workplace.
washington, dc: fema, 2012. https://www.femaflavor.org/sites/default/
files/linked_files/fema_2012%20respiratory%20health%20and%20
safety.pdf [accessed 22 june 2017].
19. fuchs ta, abed u, goosmann c, hurwitz r, schulze i, wahn v,
weinrauch y, brinkmann v, zychlinsky a. novel cell death program
leads to neutrophil extracellular traps. j cell biol 176: 231–241, 2007.
doi:10.1083/jcb.200606027.
20. garvy ba, harmsen ag. the importance of neutrophils in resistance to
pneumococcal pneumonia in adult and neonatal mice. inflammation 20:
499 –512, 1996. doi:10.1007/bf01487042.
21. geiss o, bianchi i, barrero-moreno j. correlation of volatile carbonyl
yields emitted by e-cigarettes with the temperature of the heating coil and
the perceived sensorial quality of the generated vapours. int j hyg environ
health 219: 268 –277, 2016. doi:10.1016/j.ijheh.2016.01.004.
22. gerloff j, sundar ik, freter r, sekera er, friedman ae, robinson
r, pagano t, rahman i. inflammatory response and barrier dysfunction
by different e-cigarette flavoring chemicals identified by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry in e-liquids and e-vapors on human lung epithelial cells and fibroblasts. appl in vitro toxicol 3: 28 –40, 2017. doi:10.
1089/aivt.2016.0030.
23. ghio aj, bassett m, chall an, levin dg, bromberg pa. bronchoscopy in healthy volunteers. j bronchology interv pulmonol 5: 185–194,
1998.
24. goniewicz ml, knysak j, gawron m, kosmider l, sobczak a, kurek
j, prokopowicz a, jablonska-czapla m, rosik-dulewska c, havel c,
jacob p 3rd, benowitz n. levels of selected carcinogens and toxicants in
vapour from electronic cigarettes. tob control 23: 133–139, 2014. doi:
10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2012-050859.
25. grana r, benowitz n, glantz sa. e-cigarettes: a scientific review.
circulation 129: 1972–1986, 2014. doi:10.1161/circulationaha.
114.007667.
26. gray rd, lucas cd, mackellar a, li f, hiersemenzel k, haslett c,
davidson dj, rossi ag. activation of conventional protein kinase c
(pkc) is critical in the generation of human neutrophil extracellular traps.
j inflamm (lond) 10: 12, 2013. doi:10.1186/1476-9255-10-12.
27. gray rd, mccullagh bn, mccray pb jr. nets and cf lung disease:
current status and future prospects. antibiotics (basel) 4: 62–75, 2015.
doi:10.3390/antibiotics4010062.
27a.hahn j, monakhova yb, hengen j, kohl-himmelseher m, schussler
j, hahn h, kuballa t, lachenmeier dw. electronic cigarettes: overview of chemical composition and exposure estimation. tob induc dis 12:
23, 2014. doi:10.1186/s12971-014-0023-6.
27b.harber p, saechao k, boomus c. diacetyl-induced lung disease. toxicol
rev 25: 261–272, 2006.
27c.holden vk, hines se. update on flavoring-induced lung disease. curr opin
pulm med 22: 158 –164, 2016. doi:10.1097/mcp.0000000000000250.
28. horvath km, brighton le, herbst m, noah tl, jaspers i. live
attenuated influenza virus (laiv) induces different mucosal t cell function in nonsmokers and smokers. clin immunol 142: 232–236, 2012.
doi:10.1016/j.clim.2011.12.013.
29. horvath km, brighton le, zhang w, carson jl, jaspers i. epithelial
cells from smokers modify dendritic cell responses in the context of

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.
36.

37.

38.

39.
40.

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

l291

influenza infection. am j respir cell mol biol 45: 237–245, 2011.
doi:10.1165/rcmb.2010-0190oc.
horvath km, herbst m, zhou h, zhang h, noah tl, jaspers i. nasal
lavage natural killer cell function is suppressed in smokers after live
attenuated influenza virus. respir res 12: 102, 2011. doi:10.1186/14659921-12-102.
hwang jh, lyes m, sladewski k, enany s, mceachern e, mathew
dp, das s, moshensky a, bapat s, pride dt, ongkeko wm, crotty
alexander le. electronic cigarette inhalation alters innate immunity and
airway cytokines while increasing the virulence of colonizing bacteria. j
mol med (berl) 94: 667–679, 2016. doi:10.1007/s00109-016-1378-3.
jaspers i, horvath km, zhang w, brighton le, carson jl, noah tl.
reduced expression of irf7 in nasal epithelial cells from smokers after
infection with influenza. am j respir cell mol biol 43: 368 –375, 2010.
doi:10.1165/rcmb.2009-0254oc.
jeyaseelan s, young sk, yamamoto m, arndt pg, akira s, kolls jk,
worthen gs. toll/il-1r domain-containing adaptor protein (tirap) is a
critical mediator of antibacterial defense in the lung against klebsiella
pneumoniae but not pseudomonas aeruginosa. j immunol 177: 538 –547,
2006. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.177.1.538.
jung hj, song ys, kim k, lim cj, park eh. assessment of the
anti-angiogenic, anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive properties of ethyl
vanillin. arch pharm res 33: 309 –316, 2010. doi:10.1007/s12272-0100217-2.
khlystov a, samburova v. flavoring compounds dominate toxic
aldehyde production during e-cigarette vaping. environ sci technol 50:
13080 –13085, 2016. doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b05145.
kim bh, lee yg, lee j, lee jy, cho jy. regulatory effect of
cinnamaldehyde on monocyte/macrophage-mediated inflammatory responses. mediators inflamm 2010: 529359, 2010. doi:10.1155/2010/
529359.
kim mc, kim sj, kim ds, jeon yd, park sj, lee hs, um jy, hong
s-h. vanillic acid inhibits inflammatory mediators by suppressing nf-␬b
in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated mouse peritoneal macrophages. immunopharmacol immunotoxicol 33: 525–532, 2011. doi:10.3109/08923973.
2010.547500.
kosmider l, sobczak a, fik m, knysak j, zaciera m, kurek j,
goniewicz ml. carbonyl compounds in electronic cigarette vapors:
effects of nicotine solvent and battery output voltage. nicotine tob res 16:
1319 –1326, 2014. doi:10.1093/ntr/ntu078.
kreiss k, gomaa a, kullman g, fedan k, simoes ej, enright pl.
clinical bronchiolitis obliterans in workers at a microwave-popcorn plant.
n engl j med 347: 330 –338, 2002. doi:10.1056/nejmoa020300.
lerner ca, sundar ik, yao h, gerloff j, ossip dj, mcintosh s,
robinson r, rahman i. vapors produced by electronic cigarettes and
e-juices with flavorings induce toxicity, oxidative stress, and inflammatory
response in lung epithelial cells and in mouse lung. plos one 10:
e0116732, 2015. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0116732.
liao bc, hsieh cw, liu yc, tzeng tt, sun yw, wung bs. cinnamaldehyde inhibits the tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced expression of
cell adhesion molecules in endothelial cells by suppressing nf-kappab
activation: effects upon ikappab and nrf2. toxicol appl pharmacol 229:
161–171, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.taap.2008.01.021.
martin em, clapp pw, rebuli me, pawlak ea, glista-baker e,
benowitz nl, fry rc, jaspers i. e-cigarette use results in suppression
of immune and inflammatory-response genes in nasal epithelial cells
similar to cigarette smoke. am j physiol lung cell mol physiol 311:
l135–l144, 2016. doi:10.1152/ajplung.00170.2016.
matthews jb, chen fm, milward mr, wright hj, carter k,
mcdonagh a, chapple il. effect of nicotine, cotinine and cigarette
smoke extract on the neutrophil respiratory burst. j clin periodontol 38:
208 –218, 2011. doi:10.1111/j.1600-051x.2010.01676.x.
mcneill a, brose l, calder r, hitchman s, hajek p, mcrobbie h.
e-cigarettes: an evidence update. a report commissioned by public
health england. london, uk: public health england, 2015.
mendes sj, sousa fi, pereira dm, ferro ta, pereira ic, silva bl,
pinheiro aj, mouchrek aq, monteiro-neto v, costa sk, nascimento
jl, grisotto ma, da costa r, fernandes es. cinnamaldehyde modulates lps-induced systemic inflammatory response syndrome through
trpa1-dependent and independent mechanisms. int immunopharmacol
34: 60 –70, 2016. doi:10.1016/j.intimp.2016.02.012.
müller l, brighton le, jaspers i. ozone exposed epithelial cells modify
cocultured natural killer cells. am j physiol lung cell mol physiol 304:
l332–l341, 2013. doi:10.1152/ajplung.00256.2012.

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

l292

e-liquids and cinnamaldehyde impair respiratory immune cells

47. murakami y, hirata a, ito s, shoji m, tanaka s, yasui t, machino
m, fujisawa s. re-evaluation of cyclooxygenase-2-inhibiting activity of
vanillin and guaiacol in macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide.
anticancer res 27: 801–807, 2007.
48. nauseef wm. how human neutrophils kill and degrade microbes: an
integrated view. immunol rev 219: 88 –102, 2007. doi:10.1111/j.1600065x.2007.00550.x.
49. nguyen h, finkelstein e, reznick a, cross c, van der vliet a.
cigarette smoke impairs neutrophil respiratory burst activation by aldehyde-induced thiol modifications. toxicology 160: 207–217, 2001. doi:10.
1016/s0300-483x(00)00450-9.
50. noah tl, zhou h, jaspers i. alteration of the nasal responses to
influenza virus by tobacco smoke. curr opin allergy clin immunol 12:
24 –31, 2012. doi:10.1097/aci.0b013e32834ecc80.
51. noah tl, zhou h, monaco j, horvath k, herbst m, jaspers i.
tobacco smoke exposure and altered nasal responses to live attenuated
influenza virus. environ health perspect 119: 78 –83, 2011. doi:10.1289/
ehp.1002258.
52. olmedo p, navas-acien a, hess c, jarmul s, rule a. a direct method
for e-cigarette aerosol sample collection. environ res 149: 151–156, 2016.
doi:10.1016/j.envres.2016.05.008.
54. pilsczek fh, salina d, poon kk, fahey c, yipp bg, sibley cd,
robbins sm, green fh, surette mg, sugai m, bowden mg, hussain
m, zhang k, kubes p. a novel mechanism of rapid nuclear neutrophil
extracellular trap formation in response to staphylococcus aureus. j
immunol 185: 7413–7425, 2010. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1000675.
55. pokhrel p, fagan p, kehl l, herzog ta. receptivity to e-cigarette
marketing, harm perceptions, and e-cigarette use. am j health behav 39:
121–131, 2015. doi:10.5993/ajhb.39.1.13.
56. rager je, bauer rn, müller ll, smeester l, carson jl, brighton
le, fry rc, jaspers i. dna methylation in nasal epithelial cells from
smokers: identification of ulbp3-related effects. am j physiol lung cell
mol physiol 305: l432–l438, 2013. doi:10.1152/ajplung.00116.2013.
57. romano b, borrelli f, fasolino i, capasso r, piscitelli f, cascio m,
pertwee r, coppola d, vassallo l, orlando p, di marzo v, izzo a.
the cannabinoid trpa1 agonist cannabichromene inhibits nitric oxide
production in macrophages and ameliorates murine colitis. br j pharmacol 169: 213–229, 2013. doi:10.1111/bph.12120.
58. ryder mi. nicotine effects on neutrophil f-actin formation and calcium
release: implications for tobacco use and pulmonary diseases. exp lung
res 20: 283–296, 1994. doi:10.3109/01902149409064388.
59. seow wk, thong yh, nelson rd, macfarlane gd, herzberg mc.
nicotine-induced release of elastase and eicosanoids by human neutrophils. inflammation 18: 119 –127, 1994. doi:10.1007/bf01534553.
60. sherwood cl, boitano s. airway epithelial cell exposure to distinct
e-cigarette liquid flavorings reveals toxicity thresholds and activation of
cftr by the chocolate flavoring 2,5-dimethypyrazine. respir res 17: 57,
2016. doi:10.1186/s12931-016-0369-9.
61. stämpfli mr, anderson gp. how cigarette smoke skews immune
responses to promote infection, lung disease and cancer. nat rev immunol
9: 377–384, 2009. doi:10.1038/nri2530.
62. stockley ja, walton gm, lord jm, sapey e. aberrant neutrophil
functions in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the neutrophil

as an immunotherapeutic target. int immunopharmacol 17: 1211–1217,
2013. doi:10.1016/j.intimp.2013.05.035.
63. sundar ik, javed f, romanos ge, rahman i. e-cigarettes and flavorings induce inflammatory and pro-senescence responses in oral epithelial
cells and periodontal fibroblasts. oncotarget 7: 77196 –77204, 2016.
doi:10.18632/oncotarget.12857.
64. sussan te, gajghate s, thimmulappa rk, ma j, kim jh, sudini k,
consolini n, cormier sa, lomnicki s, hasan f, pekosz a, biswal s.
exposure to electronic cigarettes impairs pulmonary anti-bacterial and
anti-viral defenses in a mouse model. plos one 10: e0116861, 2015.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0116861.
65. tateda k, moore ta, deng jc, newstead mw, zeng x, matsukawa
a, swanson ms, yamaguchi k, standiford tj. early recruitment of
neutrophils determines subsequent t1/t2 host responses in a murine
model of legionella pneumophila pneumonia. j immunol 166: 3355–
3361, 2001. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.166.5.3355.
66. tayyarah r, long ga. comparison of select analytes in aerosol from
e-cigarettes with smoke from conventional cigarettes and with ambient air.
regul toxicol pharmacol 70: 704 –710, 2014. doi:10.1016/j.yrtph.2014.
10.010.
67. tollerud dj, clark jw, brown lm, neuland cy, mann dl, pankiwtrost lk, blattner wa, hoover rn. association of cigarette smoking
with decreased numbers of circulating natural killer cells. am rev respir
dis 139: 194 –198, 1989. doi:10.1164/ajrccm/139.1.194.
68. topham nj, hewitt ew. natural killer cell cytotoxicity: how do they
pull the trigger? immunology 128: 7–15, 2009. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2567.
2009.03123.x.
68a.varlet v, farsalinos k, augsburger m, thomas a, etter jf. toxicity
assessment of refill liquids for electronic cigarettes. int j environ res
public health 12: 4796 –4815, 2015. doi:10.3390/ijerph120504796.
69. williams m, villarreal a, bozhilov k, lin s, talbot p. metal and
silicate particles including nanoparticles are present in electronic cigarette
cartomizer fluid and aerosol. plos one 8: e57987, 2013. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0057987.
69a.world health organization. who global report on mortality attributable to tobacco. geneva, switzerland: who, 2012.
70. xu y, li h, bajrami b, kwak h, cao s, liu p, zhou j, zhou y, zhu
h, ye k, luo hr. cigarette smoke (cs) and nicotine delay neutrophil
spontaneous death via suppressing production of diphosphoinositol pentakisphosphate. proc natl acad sci usa 110: 7726 –7731, 2013. doi:10.
1073/pnas.1302906110.
71. yost cc, cody mj, harris es, thornton nl, mcinturff am, martinez ml, chandler nb, rodesch ck, albertine kh, petti ca,
weyrich as, zimmerman ga. impaired neutrophil extracellular trap
(net) formation: a novel innate immune deficiency of human neonates.
blood 113: 6419 –6427, 2009. doi:10.1182/blood-2008-07-171629.
72. youn hs, lee jk, choi yj, saitoh si, miyake k, hwang dh, lee jy.
cinnamaldehyde suppresses toll-like receptor 4 activation mediated
through the inhibition of receptor oligomerization. biochem pharmacol
75: 494 –502, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.bcp.2007.08.033.
73. zhu sh, sun jy, bonnevie e, cummins se, gamst a, yin l, lee m.
four hundred and sixty brands of e-cigarettes and counting: implications
for product regulation. tob control 23, suppl 3: iii3–iii9, 2014. doi:10.
1136/tobaccocontrol-2014-051670.

ajp-lung cell mol physiol • doi:10.1152/ajplung.00452.2016 • www.ajplung.org
downloaded from www.physiology.org/journal/ajplung at purdue univ lib tss (128.210.107.131) on november 12, 2019.

