the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

of

m e dic i n e

edi t or i a l

vaping-induced lung injury
david c. christiani, m.d., m.p.h.
a number of environmental agents are known to
cause acute or subacute inhalation injury to the
lung parenchyma. indeed, emergency response
guidelines for medical personnel describe toxic
inhalation pneumonitis as a heterogeneous group
of chemically induced injuries to the lung parenchyma as well as to the upper respiratory tract.
the manifestations of such injury depend on the
characteristics (e.g., solubility, composition) and
the amount of the toxic compound or compounds
inhaled.1 much of what we know about toxic
inhalation syndromes derives from high levels of
exposure in either occupational settings (e.g., exposure to metals, solvents, acids, bases, ozone,
phosgene, or chlorine dioxide) or community settings where fires or accidents may occur (e.g., factory explosions, derailments of chemical-bearing
train cars, and overexposure to household cleaning agents). depending on the type of chemical
agent and the amount of material inhaled, patients may experience symptoms ranging from
minor respiratory tract discomfort to acute airway injury and damage to the parenchyma with
pneumonitis, alveolar edema, respiratory failure,
and death. a common pathophysiological pathway includes inflammation, edema of airways with
epithelial sloughing, alveolar inflammation, and
edema with hypoxemia.2
layden et al.3 now report in the journal a cluster
of cases from illinois and wisconsin in which
patients presented with acute, severe respiratory
distress after using e-cigarette (vaping) products.
two letters also published in the journal add further support to vaping-induced respiratory distress: a 6-case cluster from utah4 and a report of
imaging changes seen in a range of cases.5 the
centers for disease control and prevention re-

ported in late august 2019 that at least 215 acute,
severe respiratory distress cases have been identified, spanning 25 states, and as of this writing
at least 2 deaths have occurred.6 although more
investigation is needed to determine the vaping
agent or agents responsible, there is clearly an
epidemic that begs for an urgent response.
the cases demonstrate a heterogeneous collection of pneumonitis patterns that include acute
eosinophilic pneumonia, organizing pneumonia,
lipoid pneumonia, diffuse alveolar damage and
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and the rare giant-cell interstitial pneumonitis. though the precise manifestations of the
respiratory injury may be diverse, there are clues
to the precipitants that warrant attention. about
80% of the persons who vaped and became ill
reported having used both nicotine products and
tetrahydrocannabinol (thc) or cannabidiol (cbd)
products. active infection (which would include
live bacterial contamination of e-cigarette fluids)
does not appear to explain the clinical presentation, but acute toxic lung injury does seem to fit.
mixing of multiple ingredients with primary compounds and potential contaminants may result in
in vitro (or even in vivo) production of new agents
that may be toxic. e-cigarette fluids have been
shown to contain at least six groups of potentially toxic compounds: nicotine, carbonyls, volatile organic compounds (such as benzene and
toluene), particles, trace metal elements according
to flavor,7 and bacterial endotoxins and fungal
glucans.8 two flavorants alone, diacetyl and
2,3-pentanediol, have been shown to perturb gene
expression pathways related to cilia and cytoskeletal processes in normal human bronchial epithe-

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

1

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

lial cells.9 the effect of adding ingredients such as
thc or cbd to this mix needs to be investigated.
until the investigation into the cause of this
epidemic of vaping-induced respiratory injury is
complete, no conclusions can be drawn as to
which compound or compounds are the causes
of injury. in light of these cases, however, efforts
should be made to increase public awareness of
the harmful effect of vaping, and physicians should
discourage their patients from vaping.
disclosure forms provided by the author are available with the
full text of this editorial at nejm.org.
from the department of environmental health, harvard t.h.
chan school of public health, boston.
this editorial was published on september 6, 2019, at nejm.org.
1. kales sn, christiani dc. acute chemical emergencies.

n engl j med 2004;​350:​800-8.
2. matthay ma, zemans rl, zimmerman ga, et al. acute respiratory distress syndrome. nat rev dis primers 2019;​5:​18.

2

of

m e dic i n e

3. layden je, ghinai i, pray i, et al. pulmonary illness related

to e-cigarette use in illinois and wisconsin — preliminary report. n engl j med. doi:​10.1056/nejmoa1911614.
4. maddock sd, cirulis mm, callahan sj, et al. pulmonary lipidladen macrophages and vaping. n engl j med. doi:​10.1056/
nejmc1912038.
5. henry ts, kanne jp, kligerman sj. imaging of vaping-associated lung disease. n engl j med. doi:​10.1056/nejmc1911995.
6. centers for disease control and prevention. outbreak of severe pulmonary disease associated with using e-cigarette products:​
investigation notice. august 30, 2019 (https://www​.cdc​.gov/​tobacco/​
basic_information/​e​-­cigarettes/​severe​-­lung​-­disease​.html).
7. lee ms, lebouf rf, son ys, koutrakis p, christiani dc.
nicotine, aerosol particles, carbonyls and volatile organic compounds in tobacco- and menthol-flavored e-cigarettes. environ
health 2017;​16:​42.
8. lee ms, allen jg, christiani dc. endotoxin and (1→3)-β-dglucan contamination in electronic cigarette products sold in
the united states. environ health perspect 2019;​127:​47008.
9. park hr, o’sullivan m, vallarino j, et al. transcriptomic
response of primary human airway epithelial cells to flavoring
chemicals in electronic cigarettes. sci rep 2019;​9:​1400.
doi: 10.1056/nejme1912032
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society.

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

