the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

of

m e dic i n e

original article

pulmonary illness related to
e-cigarette use in illinois and wisconsin —
preliminary report
jennifer e. layden, m.d., ph.d., isaac ghinai, m.b., b.s., ian pray, ph.d.,
anne kimball, m.d., mark layer, m.d., mark tenforde, m.d., ph.d.,
livia navon, m.s., brooke hoots, ph.d., phillip p. salvatore, ph.d.,
megan elderbrook, m.p.h., thomas haupt, m.s., jeffrey kanne, m.d.,
megan t. patel, m.p.h., lori saathoff‑huber, m.p.h.,
brian a. king, ph.d., m.p.h., josh g. schier, m.d.,
christina a. mikosz, m.d., m.p.h., and jonathan meiman, m.d.​​

a bs t r ac t
background

e-cigarettes are battery-operated devices that heat a liquid and deliver an aerosolized product to the user. pulmonary illnesses related to e-cigarette use have been
reported, but no large series has been described. in july 2019, the wisconsin department of health services and the illinois department of public health received
reports of pulmonary disease associated with the use of e-cigarettes (also called
vaping) and launched a coordinated public health investigation.
methods

we defined case patients as persons who reported use of e-cigarette devices and
related products in the 90 days before symptom onset and had pulmonary infiltrates
on imaging and whose illnesses were not attributed to other causes. medical record
abstraction and case patient interviews were conducted with the use of standardized tools.
results

there were 53 case patients, 83% of whom were male; the median age of the patients
was 19 years. the majority of patients presented with respiratory symptoms (98%),
gastrointestinal symptoms (81%), and constitutional symptoms (100%). all case patients had bilateral infiltrates on chest imaging (which was part of the case definition).
a total of 94% of the patients were hospitalized, 32% underwent intubation and
mechanical ventilation, and one death was reported. a total of 84% of the patients
reported having used tetrahydrocannabinol products in e-cigarette devices, although
a wide variety of products and devices was reported. syndromic surveillance data
from illinois showed that the mean monthly rate of visits related to severe respiratory
illness in june through august of 2019 was twice the rate that was observed in the
same months in 2018.
conclusions

from the illinois department of public
health (j.e.l., i.g., l.n., m.t.p., l.s.-h.),
springfield; the epidemic intelligence
service, center for surveillance, epidemiology, and laboratory services (i.g.,
i.p., a.k., m.t., p.p.s.), national center
for environmental health (m.l.), the division of state and local readiness, center for preparedness and response
(l.n.), the division of unintentional injury prevention, national center for injury prevention and control (b.h., j.g.s.,
c.a.m.), and the office on smoking and
health, national center for chronic disease prevention and health promotion
(b.a.k.), centers for disease control and
prevention, and emory university school
of medicine (m.l.) — all in atlanta; the
wisconsin department of health services
(i.p., m.e., j.m.), the wisconsin division
of public health, bureau of communicable disease (t.h.), and the department
of radiology, university of wisconsin
school of medicine and public health
(j.k.) — all in madison. address reprint
requests to dr. layden at the illinois department of public health, 69 w. washington st., chicago, il 60602, or at
­jennifer​.­layden@​­illinois​.­gov.
this article was published on september 6,
2019, and updated on september 16, 2019,
at nejm.org.
doi: 10.1056/nejmoa1911614
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society.

case patients presented with similar clinical characteristics. although the features of
e-cigarette use that were responsible for injury have not been identified, this cluster
of illnesses represents an emerging clinical syndrome or syndromes. additional work
is needed to characterize the pathophysiology and to identify the definitive causes.
n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

1

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

e

lectronic cigarettes, or e-cigarettes, include a diverse group of batterypowered devices that allow users to inhale
aerosolized substances.1 e-cigarette aerosol generally contains fewer toxic chemicals than conventional cigarette smoke.2 however, e-cigarette
aerosol is not harmless; it can expose users to
substances known to have adverse health effects,
including ultra-fine particles, heavy metals, volatile organic compounds, and other harmful ingredients.2,3 e-cigarettes are commonly used to inhale
nicotine but can also be used to deliver substances such as tetrahydrocannabinol (thc), cannabidiol (cbd), and butane hash oils (also known as
dabs).4 e-cigarettes entered the u.s. marketplace
table 1. outbreak surveillance case definitions of severe pulmonary disease
associated with e-cigarette use — august 30, 2019.*
confirmed case
use of an e-cigarette (vaping) or dabbing in 90 days before symptom onset;
and
pulmonary infiltrate, such as opacities on plain-film radiograph of the chest
or ground-glass opacities on chest ct; and
absence of pulmonary infection on initial workup: the minimum criteria include negative respiratory viral panel and influenza pcr or rapid test if local
epidemiology supports testing. all other clinically indicated testing for respiratory infectious disease (e.g., urine antigen testing for streptococcus pneumoniae and legionella, sputum culture if productive cough, bronchoalveolarlavage culture if done, blood culture, and presence of hiv-related opportunistic respiratory infections if appropriate) must be negative; and
no evidence in medical record of alternative plausible diagnoses (e.g., cardiac,
rheumatologic, or neoplastic process)
probable case
using an e-cigarette (vaping) or dabbing in 90 days before symptom onset;
and
pulmonary infiltrate, such as opacities on plain film chest radiograph or
ground-glass opacities on chest ct; and
infection identified by means of culture or pcr, but the clinical team caring
for the patient believes that this is not the sole cause of the underlying respiratory disease process; or as the minimum criteria, to rule out pulmonary infection not met (testing not performed) and clinical team caring for the patient believes that this is not the sole cause of the underlying respiratory disease process; and
no evidence in medical record of alternative plausible diagnoses (e.g., cardiac,
rheumatologic, or neoplastic process)
*	these surveillance case definitions are from the centers for disease control
and prevention and are meant for surveillance purposes and not for clinical
diagnosis. they are subject to change and will be updated as additional information becomes available, if needed. vaping was defined as the use of an
electronic device (e.g., electronic nicotine-delivery system, electronic cigarette,
e-cigarette, vaporizer, vapes, vape pen, dab pen, or other device) or dabbing
(superheating in the device for inhaling substances such as nicotine, marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol [thc], thc concentrates, cannabidiol [cbd], synthetic cannabinoids, and flavorings). hiv denotes human immunodeficiency
virus, and pcr polymerase chain reaction.

2

of

m e dic i n e

around 2007 and since 2014 have been the most
commonly used tobacco product among youths
in the united states.1 during the 2017–2018 period,
the prevalence of current use of e-cigarettes (also
called vaping) increased from 11.7% to 20.8%
among u.s. high school students.5 in contrast,
3.2% of u.s. adults reported current e-cigarette
use in 2018.6
published case reports have detailed a range
of severe pulmonary illnesses among persons
who have reported use of nicotine or cannabis
extracts in e-cigarettes.7-13 no previous case series, however, has described large clusters of
temporally related pulmonary illnesses linked to
the use of e-cigarette products (e.g., devices,
liquids, refillable pods, and cartridges).
during july 2019, the wisconsin department
of health services (wdhs) and the illinois department of public health (idph) received multiple reports of pulmonary disease of unclear
cause that was possibly associated with the use of
e-cigarettes and related products, which prompted a coordinated public health investigation. as
of august 27, 2019, a total of 53 cases meeting
the established case definitions (table 1) have been
reported by clinicians in wisconsin (28 cases) and
illinois (25 cases). similar cases have been reported in at least 25 states, and the centers for
disease control and prevention (cdc) is coordinating a public health response in multiple states.
in this article, we summarize the clinical characteristics and use of e-cigarettes and related
products reported among the initial 53 case patients in wisconsin and illinois who were identified as being part of this pulmonary disease
cluster.

me thods
outbreak identification

on july 10, 2019, the children’s hospital of wisconsin notified the wdhs of five previously
healthy adolescents who had been admitted during the previous 30 days with progressive dyspnea, fatigue, and hypoxemia. two patients underwent intubation and mechanical ventilation.
computed tomography (ct) of the chest in four
patients revealed bilateral ground-glass opacities, predominantly in the lower lobes. extensive
infectious, rheumatologic, and oncologic workups were unrevealing. all patients reported a
history of e-cigarette use in the days or weeks

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pulmonary illness related to e-cigaret te use

before symptom onset. this report is part of an
ongoing public health investigation.
on july 25, the wdhs issued an alert to clinicians describing the clinical syndrome and requested that similar cases of pulmonary disease
associated with e-cigarette use be reported to
public health authorities. the wdhs was subsequently contacted by a physician in illinois seeking clinical treatment guidance for a patient with
similar clinical presentation and e-cigarette product exposure, and the wdhs promptly notified
the idph on july 31. a joint wdhs–idph public
health investigation was initiated on august 1 to
identify additional case patients and to characterize the pulmonary clinical syndrome related to
the use of e-cigarettes and related products. the
cdc was consulted for technical assistance early
in the investigation, and a cdc epidemiologic assistance field team (epi-aid) was deployed to the
wdhs and idph on august 20, 2019.
case definition

an outbreak case definition was initially developed by the wdhs and idph and was further
refined in coordination with the cdc and the
council for state and territorial epidemiologists.
table 1 provides specific details of the probable
and confirmed case definitions. all cases described in this article were classified according
to and met the current working outbreak definitions of confirmed or probable cases that has
been mutually accepted by the cdc and the jurisdictions that had been affected earliest in the
outbreak (table 1).
epidemiologic investigation

the wdhs and idph released their first health
alert notices on july 25 and august 2, respectively,
to inform clinicians of the initial cases and to
request reporting of possible cases to their local
health departments. medical records were requested for all patients with reported cases. a standardized medical record abstraction form was developed in research electronic data capture software
(redcap, vanderbilt university) to systematically collect demographic data on the case patients, the signs and symptoms at presentation,
laboratory results, imaging findings, reported
drug exposures, clinical course, treatments, and
medical outcomes. infectious disease and pulmonary consultations and discharge notes were
reviewed to determine whether causes other than

vaping were potentially responsible for the clinical syndrome. medical charts were reviewed by a
group of clinicians from the investigative teams
(six of the authors) with at least two reviewers for
each chart, and discrepancies between reviewers
were adjudicated by means of consensus. a standardized interview was administered to case patients to characterize the use of e-cigarettes and
related products in the 3 months before symptom onset. information regarding such use came
from clinical documentation and interviews with
patients.
syndromic surveillance

to assess whether this cluster represented an
increase in severe respiratory illness, the idph
established a baseline rate of severe unexplained
respiratory illness by using a syndromic surveillance definition (in contrast to a working outbreak disease-specific case definition). syndromic
surveillance monitors near-real-time prediagnostic data sources (largely from emergency department [ed] visits) to provide early detection of
potential public health threats by means of validated algorithms.14 data from the national syndromic surveillance program15 were searched with
the use of the electronic surveillance system for
the early notification of community-based epidemics (essence) tool, which includes information on vital signs, reported symptoms, ed
discharge destination, and diagnosis.15
all ed visits between january 1, 2018, and
august 15, 2019, among persons 14 to 30 years of
age were searched in order to identify encounters
for severe unexplained respiratory illness (defined
in table s2 in the supplementary appendix, available with the full text of this article at nejm.org);
searches were limited to counties in illinois where
cases had already been identified. the syndromic
definition was designed to capture data on patients who had presented to eds in illinois with
severe respiratory symptoms and initial pulse
oximetry of no more than 96% (or if pulse oximetry was not recorded); who were admitted to the
hospital at which they presented or if the discharge
disposition was not to home; and who had a
discharge diagnosis that was not consistent with
a known cause (e.g., bacterial or viral pneumonia
or a chronic respiratory disease such as asthma).
the formulated query was validated to ensure that
it captured data on ed visits by all patients with
confirmed or probable cases in illinois.

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

3

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

of

m e dic i n e

table 2. demographic characteristics, symptoms, evaluation, and clinical course of 53 case patients.*
characteristic

values

median age (range) — yr

19 (16–53)

male sex — no./total no. (%)

44/53 (83)

race or ethnic group — no./total no. (%)†
white

37/45 (82)

black

4/45 (9)

hispanic

4/45 (9)

medical history documented in medical record — no./total no. (%)
asthma

16/53 (30)

mood or anxiety disorder

18/53 (34)

e-cigarette use in the previous 90 days — no./total no. (%)‡
reported nicotine use

25/41 (61)

reported only nicotine use

7/41 (17)

reported thc use

33/41 (80)

reported only thc use

15/41 (37)

reported nicotine and thc use

18/41 (44)

reported cbd use

3/41 (7)

symptoms reported at presentation
median duration of symptoms before presentation (range) — days
any respiratory symptom — no./total no. (%)§

6 (0–61)
52/53 (98)

shortness of breath

46/53 (87)

any chest pain

29/53 (55)

pleuritic chest pain

20/53 (38)

cough

44/53 (83)

hemoptysis

6/53 (11)

any gastrointestinal symptom — no./total no. (%)§

43/53 (81)

nausea

37/53 (70)

vomiting

35/53 (66)

diarrhea

23/53 (43)

abdominal pain

23/53 (43)

any constitutional symptom – no./total no. (%)§

53/53 (100)

subjective fever

43/53 (81)

chills

31/53 (58)

weight loss

14/53 (26)

fatigue or malaise

24/53 (45)

headache — no./total no. (%)

21/53 (40)

vital signs at presentation
temperature ≥38°c — no./total no. (%)

15/51 (29)

heart rate >100 beats/min — no./total no. (%)

34/53 (64)

respiratory rate >20 breaths/min — no./total no. (%)

22/51 (43)

oxygen saturation while breathing ambient air — no./total no. (%)

4

≥95%

16/52 (31)

89–94%

20/52 (38)

≤88%

16/52 (31)

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pulmonary illness related to e-cigaret te use

table 2. (continued.)
characteristic

values

initial laboratory results
white-cell count >11,000/mm3 — no./total no. (%)

45/52 (87)

white-cell count with >80% neutrophils — no./total no. (%)

34/36 (94)

erythrocyte sedimentation rate >30 mm/hr — no./total no. (%)

14/15 (93)

sodium <135 mmol/liter — no./total no. (%)

15/49 (31)

potassium <3.5 mmol/liter — no./total no. (%)

16/46 (35)

aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, or both — no./total no. (%)
>35 u/liter¶

20/40 (50)

>105 u/liter‖

2/40 (5)

median procalcitonin (iqr) — μg/liter **

0.58 (0.35–1.00)

median creatinine (iqr) — mg/dl††

0.87 (0.76–0.99)

initial radiographic findings
abnormal chest radiograph — no./total no. (%)

48/53 (91)

abnormal chest ct — no./total no. (%)

48/48 (100)

bilateral infiltrates identified on chest radiograph or ct — no./total no. (%)

53/53 (100)

treatment
antibiotics for lower respiratory tract infection — no./total no. (%)
as outpatient

24/53 (45)

during hospitalization

45/50 (90)

glucocorticoids — no./total no. (%)
systemic glucocorticoids, oral or intravenous, during hospitalization

46/50 (92)

intravenous glucocorticoids

38/46 (83)

had clinical improvement documented with use of systemic glucocorticoids

30/46 (65)

clinical course
hospitalization — no./total no. (%)

50/53 (94)

outpatient or ed visit before hospitalization — no./total no. (%)

36/50 (72)

median duration of hospitalization (range) — days

6 (1–25)

receipt of supplemental oxygen — no./total no. (%)

46/53 (87)

receipt of noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation — no./total no. (%)

19/53 (36)

intubation and mechanical ventilation — no./total no. (%)

17/53 (32)

admission to intensive care unit — no./total no. (%)

31/53 (58)

death — no./total no. (%)

1/53 (2)

*	ed denotes emergency department, and iqr interquartile range.
†	race and ethnic group were reported by the patient. data on race or ethnic group were missing for 8 patients.
percentages are shown for patients with data.
‡	some data were missing because a full exposure history was not obtained from interview. tetrahydrocannabinol
(thc) refers to marijuana-derived extracts or concentrates that contain thc and were used in e-cigarettes.
cannabidiol (cbd) refers to other cannabis extracts or concentrates that contain cbd as the primary ingredient and
were used in e-cigarettes.
§	the symptoms included in this section are those listed below.
¶	four patients had documented testing for aspartate aminotransferase only, and one had testing for alanine aminotransferase only.
‖	a value of more than 105 u per liter is more than three times the upper limit of the normal range, which is used to
indicate severe aminotransferase abnormality.
**	procalcitonin was measured in 21 patients. reference ranges differed among the hospitals.
††	to convert the values for creatinine to micromoles per liter, multiply by 88.4.

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

5

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

statistical analysis

descriptive analyses were performed for all the
patients with confirmed or probable cases that
were reported in wisconsin and illinois. results
were reported as proportions or median values.
all analyses were conducted with the use of stata
software, version 16 (statacorp). proportions regarding e-cigarette use were limited to the 41 patients who underwent extensive interviews regarding vaping. to calculate the rate of visits for
severe unexplained respiratory illness according
to syndromic surveillance, a denominator of all
ed visits for the same time period, age range,
and hospitals was used. the mean monthly rates
of ed visits for severe unexplained respiratory
illness per 10,000 ed visits for june 1 through
august 15, 2018, and for june 1 through august
15, 2019, were compared with a two-sided student’s t-test.

r e sult s
demographic characteristics of the patients

as of august 27, 2019, a total of 35 patients had
cases reported to the wdhs, and 47 to the idph.
of the 82 cases reported, 2 were excluded after
chart review, and 27 cases are pending case classification because of incomplete medical records
or interviews. a total of 53 case patients met the
definition of a probable case (25 total, with 13
in wisconsin and 12 in illinois) or a confirmed
case (28 total, with 15 in wisconsin and 13 in
illinois). the dates of symptom onset ranged
from april 21 through august 20, 2019, which is
outside the typical influenza season. as of august 27, 2019, comprehensive interviews had been
conducted for 77% of the 53 patients with a confirmed or probable case.
the median age of the case patients was 19
years (range, 16 to 53) (table 2); 32% of the patients were younger than 18 years of age. the
majority of case patients were male (83%). most
of the patients had no documented relevant
medical history, with no underlying chronic lung
disease except for asthma (which was noted in
30% of the patients). patients resided in multiple
urban and rural, noncontiguous counties across
both states.
clinical presentations

case patients presented with a combination of
respiratory, gastrointestinal, and constitutional
6

of

m e dic i n e

symptoms (table 2). the median duration of
symptoms before hospital presentation was 6 days,
with a wide range (0 to 61 days) of symptom duration; 72% of patients presented within 7 days
after symptom onset. a total of 72% of the hospitalized patients had been seen in outpatient
settings (eds, urgent care clinics, or other outpatient clinics) before admission for related symptoms, and 45% of all the patients who were seen
in the outpatient or ed setting received antibiotic agents for presumed respiratory tract infection, primarily oral azithromycin (in 12 of the 24
patients who received antibiotics on an outpatient basis) or levofloxacin (in 4). all the patients
who received antibiotics on an outpatient basis
had reported progression of respiratory symptoms, which had prompted subsequent hospital
admission.
a total of 98% of the patients had respiratory
symptoms at hospital presentation (the 1 patient
who reported no respiratory symptoms had an
oxygen saturation of 91% on hospital admission).
the most common respiratory symptoms were
shortness of breath (87%), cough (83%), and chest
pain (55%). reported gastrointestinal symptoms
included nausea (70%), vomiting (66%), diarrhea
(43%), and abdominal pain (43%). all patients
had one or more constitutional symptoms, with
the most common being subjective fever (81%).
upper respiratory symptoms such as rhinorrhea,
sneezing, or congestion were not commonly reported.
details of the vital signs at presentation and
laboratory findings are shown in table 2. according to the initial recorded vital signs, 64%
of patients had tachycardia (heart rate range,
55 to 146 beats per minute), and 43% had tachypnea (respiratory rate range, 15 to 48 breaths per
minute). at presentation, 38% of the patients had
oxygen saturation between 89% and 94% while
they were breathing ambient air, and 31% had
oxygen saturation of less than 89% while they
were breathing ambient air. a total of 29% of
the patients had a documented fever (temperature, ≥38°c) at triage, and 53% had a fever recorded at some point in their admission, but
medical records were incomplete and this may
be an underrepresentation of the true proportion
with an objective fever.
a high percentage of patients had leukocytosis (87%), defined as a white-cell count of more
than 11,000 per cubic millimeter, with a median

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pulmonary illness related to e-cigaret te use

white-cell count of 15,900 per cubic millimeter
(interquartile range, 12,300 to 18,100). a total of
94% of the patients had a neutrophil predominance (neutrophil percentage, >80%). among the
27 patients that had an eosinophil percent listed,
none had a value greater than 2%. the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was more than 30 mm
per hour in 93% of the 15 patients in whom it
was checked. the median procalcitonin value
was 0.58 μg per liter (reference ranges differed
among the hospitals). mildly elevated serum
aminotransferase values were noted in 50% of
patients and were transient. approximately one
third of the patients had mild hyponatremia,
hypokalemia, or both. acute renal insufficiency
was observed in 1 patient, which resolved with
intravenous hydration.
cytopathological findings

a total of 24 patients underwent bronchoalveolar
lavage; the majority of patients received antibiotics, glucocorticoids, or both before the procedure.
of the 14 bronchoalveolar-lavage specimens with
reported cell counts, the median values were as
follows: eosinophils 0% (range, 0 to 6), neutrophils 65% (range, 10 to 91), lymphocytes 7%
(range, 1 to 40), and macrophages 21% (range,
2 to 68). a total of 7 of the 14 cytology reports
on bronchoalveolar-lavage specimens noted lipid-laden macrophages with oil red o stain; the
other 7 reports did not comment on the use of
oil red o stain. of the 7 samples with noted
lipid-laden macrophages, 2 reports listed moderate lipid-laden macrophages, and the rest were
scant to minimal.
three patients underwent transbronchial lung
biopsy, and two of these patients also underwent
an open lung biopsy, which was performed during clinical workup; two of these patients were
receiving both antibiotics and glucocorticoids at
the time, and one was receiving neither before the
procedure. pathologists reported a range of findings, including mild and nonspecific inflammation, acute diffuse alveolar damage and foamy
macrophages, and interstitial and peribronchiolar granulomatous pneumonitis. infectious disease evaluations for possible viral, bacterial, and
fungal pathogens were negative in nearly all case
patients in whom the testing was performed
(table s1 in the supplementary appendix).

imaging findings

at presentation, 91% of the patients had an
abnormal chest radiograph (table 2). a total of
48 of the 53 case patients underwent ct, and the
findings were abnormal for 100% of these patients. opacities in both lungs were present in
100% of the patients. ground-glass opacities in
both lungs were characteristically observed on
ct, sometimes with subpleural sparing. of the
48 patients who underwent ct imaging, 4 cases
of pneumomediastinum, 5 pleural effusions, and
1 case of pneumothorax were present (in 8 patients). one patient had both a pneumomediastinum and a pneumothorax, and one patient had
both a pneumomediastinum and pleural effusion.
clinical course

all but 3 patients were hospitalized (50 patients
[94%]), and the median duration of hospital stay
was 6 days (table 2). intensive care unit admission for respiratory failure was common (58% of
all patients; 62% of hospitalized patients), and
32% of all patients underwent intubation and
mechanical ventilation (34% of hospitalized patients). no patient received a tracheostomy.
a total of 15 case patients had documentation in clinical notes of having acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ards). of these 15 patients,
the investigative team was able to independently
verify that 9 patients (60%) met the berlin criteria for ards,16 with an average index of partial
pressure of arterial oxygen (pao2) to fraction of
inspired oxygen (fio2) of 189 mm hg. for the
remaining 6 patients, medical records and documentation were insufficient to verify the diagnosis independently. two patients underwent
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and one
of these patients died. for both patients, there
was clinical documentation that the ards criteria were met.
most patients received systemic glucocorticoids (intravenous or oral) during admission
(92% of the patients overall; 62% received intravenous administration). documentation by the
clinical team that the respiratory improvement
was due to the use of glucocorticoids was found
in the majority of patient notes (65%). all patients who began receiving systemic glucocorticoids were treated with at least 7 days of glucocorticoid therapy.

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

7

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

e-cigarette use

all patients had a history of use of e-cigarettes and
related products within the 90 days before symptom onset, and 94% of those with data (32 of 34
patients) regarding the date of last use reported
vaping in the week before symptom onset. most
patients (29 of 33 patients [88%]) reported at
least daily e-cigarette use. of the 41 patients
who were extensively interviewed, 61% reported
use of nicotine products, 80% reported use of
thc products, and 7% reported use of cbd
products (table 2). a total of 37% of the patients
reported using thc products only, whereas 17%
reported using nicotine-containing products only.
a total of 44% of the patients reported using
both nicotine and thc products. patients reported using 14 distinct brands of thc products
and 13 brands of nicotine products in a wide
range of flavors. the most common thc product
that was reported was marketed under the “dank
vape” label (reported by 24 of 41 interviewed patients [59%]). patients reported use of a number
of different e-cigarette devices to aerosolize these
products. of the 41 patients who were extensively
interviewed, 7 reported smoking combustible
cigarettes as well.
clinical series of selected patents
with confirmed cases

figure 1 shows the clinical course of five patients who met the confirmed case definition
and who underwent intubation and mechanical
ventilation. representative of the case series in
general, most of the patients had previous outpatient visits before admission and ultimately
began receiving systemic glucocorticoids.
select clinical vignette with radiographs

a 17-year-old male patient with no clinically significant medical history presented to a hospital
ed with a 2-day history of shortness of breath,
nonproductive cough, and generalized weakness
as well as a 1-week history of fever before presentation, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and
diarrhea. he sought care with his primary care
provider and at multiple eds for his gastrointestinal symptoms during the week before his admission and was treated with intravenous fluids
and given metronidazole, levofloxacin, and an
antiemetic agent. his condition worsened, and
new respiratory symptoms developed, so he presented again to the ed, where he was found to
8

of

m e dic i n e

have hypoxemia with an oxygen saturation of
85% while he was breathing ambient air, tachycardia with a heart rate of 112 beats per minute,
and a temperature of 37.9°c. a radiograph of the
chest showed opacities in both lungs that were
suggestive of infection or acute lung injury
(fig. 2a). his laboratory results showed leukocytosis (white-cell count, 18,000 cells per cubic
millimeter) with a neutrophil predominance
(94%) and no eosinophils (0%), as well as elevated inflammatory markers with a c-reactive protein level of 32 mg per deciliter and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 68 mm per hour.
the patient began receiving amoxicillin and
azithromycin as empirical therapy for community-acquired and atypical pneumonia and was
admitted to the hospital while he was receiving
3 liters of oxygen per minute through a nasal
cannula. within hours, he was transferred to the
pediatric intensive care unit owing to respiratory
deterioration. he was intubated and mechanically ventilated, receiving a high fio2 and positive
end-expiratory pressure, and met the criteria for
moderate ards. a radiograph of the chest that
was obtained approximately 12 hours after presentation showed rapid worsening of diffuse lung
opacities (fig. 2b), and a high-resolution ct image of the chest showed diffuse hazy groundglass opacities with subpleural sparing, findings
consistent with pneumonitis (fig. 2c through
2e). on day 2 of hospitalization, the patient underwent bronchoscopy, which showed normalappearing bronchi. cytologic testing of bronchoalveolar-lavage specimens showed a neutrophil
predominance (78%) with no eosinophils (0%)
and a moderate number of lipid-laden macrophages on oil red o staining. infectious workup,
including blood cultures, testing for human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), urinary histoplasma
and blastomyces antigens, polymerase-chain-reaction (pcr) panel for nasopharyngeal respiratory
virus, pcr panel for enteric pathogens, and
bronchoalveolar-lavage studies including bacterial and fungal cultures and pneumocystis stain,
was negative. he began receiving high-dose intravenous glucocorticoids on day 2 of the hospitalization, and antibiotics were discontinued on
day 4 because an infectious cause was deemed to
be unlikely. the patient’s clinical condition improved, and he was extubated after receiving
intravenous glucocorticoids for 3 days. the patient was discharged home on hospital day 6 with

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pulmonary illness related to e-cigaret te use

* outpatient medical visit

glucocorticoids administered

extracorporeal membrane oxygenation

antibiotics administered

hospital admission

continued after discharge

mechanical ventilation

course of illness

death

0

5

10

15

20

25

number of days
30 35 40

45

50

55

60

65

70

highest available ventilator data
fio2, 1.0;
vt, 450 ml; 26 breaths/min;
peep, 10 cm h2o; pao2:fio2, 176 mm hg

patient 1

*
patient 2

fio2, 0.6; vt, 450 ml;
peep, 10 cm h2o; pao2:fio2, 195 mm hg;
plateau pressure, 24 cm h2o

patient 3

fio2, 1.0;
vt, 550 ml (7.7 ml/kg ibw);
24 breaths/min; peep, 10 cm h2o;
pao2:fio2, 96 mm hg;
plateau pressure, 24 cm h2o

*

fio2, 0.7; “on a low tidal
volume protocol”; pao2:fio2, 207 mm hg;
peep, 10 cm h2o

patient 4

*
fio2, 1.0;
vt, 300 ml (5.0 ml/kg ibw);
14 breaths/min; peep, 15 cm h2o;
pao2:fio2, 59 mm hg;
plateau pressure, 30 cm h2o

patient 5

*
0

* *
5

10

15

20

25

30 35 40 45
number of days

50

55

60

65

70

figure 1. clinical course and ventilator use in selected patients with confirmed severe pulmonary disease who were admitted
to an intensive care unit.
patients were selected if they had a confirmed case of severe pulmonary disease associated with e-cigarette use, according to the august
30, 2019, outbreak surveillance case definitions of the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc); if they had been intubated;
and if ventilatory requirements for the case definition were documented. patient 5 was admitted to the hospital and discharged and was
later readmitted. fio2 denotes fraction of inspired oxygen, ibw ideal body weight, pao2 partial pressure of arterial oxygen, peep positive
end-expiratory pressure, and vt tidal volume.

instructions to continue an oral glucocorticoid– was twice the mean monthly rate that occurred
tapering regimen for 6 weeks.
between june 1 and august 15, 2018 (7.4 cases
per 10,000 visits vs. 3.8 cases per 10,000 visits),
syndromic surveillance
in illinois counties. this difference was signifithe mean monthly rate of visits to the ed for se- cant for both male and female patients (p<0.05
vere respiratory illness as identified by syndromic for both comparisons; p<0.001 for the combined
surveillance between june 1 and august 15, 2019, comparison) (fig. 3).
n engl j med

nejm.org

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

9

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

a

b

c

d

of

m e dic i n e

e

figure 2. chest radiographs and high-resolution computed tomographic imaging in a 17-year-old male patient
with diffuse lung disease.
in the initial radiograph of the chest at admission (panel a), the anterior–posterior image shows hazy opacities that
are predominant in the mid and lower lungs. an anterior–posterior radiograph of the chest that was obtained approximately 12 hours after presentation (panel b) shows rapid worsening of diffuse lung opacities with developing
consolidation and air bronchograms. axial (panels c and d, showing different segments of the lung in order to visualize the extent of the opacities) and coronal reformatted (panel e) high-resolution ct images of the chest show
ground-glass opacities in both lungs and dense consolidation in a peribronchial and perilobular distribution, with
relative subpleural sparing — findings consistent with an organizing pneumonia pattern of lung injury.

10

n engl j med

nejm.org

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pulmonary illness related to e-cigaret te use

in this report, we describe an ongoing investigation of pulmonary disease associated with the
use of e-cigarettes and related products in the
days and weeks before symptom onset in two
states. available data on trends in syndromic
surveillance suggest that the increase in the patients presenting with severe pulmonary disease
is relatively recent. although the definitive cause
of this cluster remains unknown, the severity of
the illness and the recent increase in the incidence of this clinical syndrome indicates that
these cases represent a new or newly recognized
and worrisome cluster of pulmonary disease related to vaping.
e-cigarette liquids and aerosols have been
shown to contain a variety of chemical constituents that may have adverse health effects.17 major declared constituents in nicotine-based ecigarettes include propylene glycol and glycerin,18
in addition to nicotine. identified contaminants
include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, nitrosamines, volatile organic chemicals, and inorganic chemicals such as toxic metals.18,19 endotoxins and flavoring compounds such as diacetyl
and 2,3-pentanedione have also been detected.20,21
the health risks of some constituents remain
poorly characterized, and toxicologic assessment
of these substances is an active area of ongoing
research.18,19 in addition to nicotine, e-cigarette
devices can be used to deliver a variety of other
recreational drugs, including thc-based oils.4,22
although the cause or causes of the reported
illnesses remain under investigation, products
containing thc are the most commonly reported
e-cigarette product exposure among these case
patients (84%). however, 17% of the patients
reported using only nicotine-based products,
and 44% reported using both thc-based and
nicotine-based products. information on product
use is based on reports by the patients, and patients may be reluctant to report illicit drug use.
less clear is the relevance of e-cigarette device
types that were used, as well as the importance of
practice habits (frequency of use, dosing, etc.),
product delivery methods (e.g., adulteration of
devices), and definitive product content. thcbased oils and waxes can be widely purchased,
despite the fact that they are illegal in the majority of states, including illinois and wisconsin,

ed visits for severe unexplained respiratory illness
per 10,000 visits

discussion
14
12

female patients, 2018
female patients, 2019
male patients, 2018
male patients, 2019

10
8
6
4
2
0

january february march

april

may

june

july

august

month

figure 3. emergency department (ed) visits for severe unexplained
respiratory illness among patients 14 to 30 years of age, according to
sex, in illinois counties in 2018 and 2019.
the periods of january through august in 2018 and 2019 were compared.
outbreak-related cases have been identified since april 2019 and are ongoing.

and the content of these products is largely unknown and unregulated.23
pulmonary illnesses that have been linked to
e-cigarette use have been limited to individual case
reports. nicotine-containing liquids have been associated with a variety of disease presentations.
diffuse alveolar hemorrhage and exogenous lipoid
pneumonia have been observed.24,25 acute interstitial lung disease, including acute eosinophilic
pneumonia, respiratory bronchiolitis-associated
interstitial lung disease, and hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, has also been associated with use
of nicotine-containing liquids.7,8,26 health effects
from dabbing of cannabis concentrates (i.e., superheating of substances containing high levels
of thc or cbd in the device) are less frequently
reported in the literature. butane hash oil has
been associated with pneumonitis,12,27 and thc
oil has been associated with organizing pneumonia.13
in the case series presented here, the population was generally young and healthy, yet acute
severe pulmonary disease developed and resulted
in critical care and respiratory support. given the
disparate nature of e-cigarette–associated illnesses that have been reported in the literature, it is

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

11

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

notable that case patients in wisconsin and illinois presented with similar clinical findings and
progression of disease, which suggests a similar
pathophysiological mechanism of lung injury.
however, the definitive pathology for these pulmonary diseases has not been established, and
it is possible that these pulmonary diseases represent a range of disease processes.
as noted above, many chemical constituents
that have been detected in e-cigarette liquids could
cause acute and subacute effects. these constituents may also undergo thermal decomposition
(pyrolysis) by the metallic e-cigarette heating coils
to produce new compounds in aerosol with different toxicologic profiles.28,29 the coils may also
release metals such as manganese and zinc into
the aerosol, which can be toxic when inhaled.30
alone or in combination, these substances could
result in a variety of pulmonary illnesses such as
chemical pneumonitis, acute eosinophilic pneumonia, acute and subacute hypersensitivity pneumonitis, lipoid pneumonia, metal fume fever, and
polymer fume fever. acute lung injury and ards
could result in severe cases.
of note, eosinophilia was not widely seen in
peripheral blood nor observed in bronchoalveolar-lavage specimens, and characteristic radiographic findings of exogenous lipoid pneumonia
(e.g., low attenuation consolidations) were not
reported in radiograph reports. among the cytologic reports on bronchoalveolar-lavage specimens
that included information on specific oil staining, lipid-laden macrophages were reported as
moderate in two and as only “scant” or “minimal”
in the others; specific mention of oil staining was
not provided in the other cytology reports of
bronchoalveolar-lavage specimens. interestingly,
opacities in both lungs were noted on either radiograph or ct of the chest in all the patients.
a comprehensive review of imaging by a panel
of expert chest radiologists could help to more
completely characterize and identify unique radiographic findings.
the cdc released a clinical health advisory31
on august 30, 2019, recommending that all patients who report e-cigarette use within the previous 90 days be asked about signs and symptoms
of pulmonary illness. clinicians should consider
the possibility of pulmonary disease associated
with vaping when patients report recent use,
especially when other causes are not identified.

12

of

m e dic i n e

alternative causes of respiratory illness may be
more likely than vaping, and therefore clinicians
should also continue to consider and appropriately assess for such possible causes of illness in
patients reporting respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms and e-cigarette use. although our
current understanding of the appropriate treatment strategies is insufficient to provide clinical recommendations, patients thus far have had
clinical improvement with systemic glucocorticoid
therapy, and the majority of patients have received
prolonged courses.
this article details the clinical spectrums of
the largest cohort of 53 case patients from two
states. detailed evaluation of medical records,
chest imaging, laboratory results, and exposure
information among these cases provided an opportunity to evaluate, characterize, and compare
their clinical courses. additional data are needed to define the causative exposures. these data
are preliminary and subject to several limitations. exposure information was reported by the
patients and may be subject to recall error or
hesitancy to report vaping practices. given the
emerging nature of this syndrome, this initial
series may capture data on patients with more
severe cases who presented for evaluation and
may not capture data on more mild clinical presentations that were related to the same exposure
or disease process.32 medical chart data were not
complete for all patients, especially with regard
to respiratory ventilator variables, which limits a
more detailed description of disease severity. not
all patients had an exhaustive list of negative
findings on serologic tests for infectious causes,
cultures, or molecular studies.
in summary, we report a case series of severe
pulmonary disease associated with the use of
e-cigarettes and related products among generally young, healthy persons in wisconsin and
illinois who presented between april and august
2019. cases continue to be reported to both these
health departments and across at least 25 states
nationwide. detailed interviews with patients to
delineate all e-cigarette exposures, including both
devices and substances used, will help to further
narrow the list of potential agents that may be
responsible for the observed increase in pulmonary disease associated with vaping. the wdhs
and idph are also working to obtain e-cigarette
devices and liquids for further testing, and the

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

pulmonary illness related to e-cigaret te use

forensic chemistry center of the food and drug used by youths, young adults, pregnant women,
administration is pursuing nontargeted analyses and adults who do not currently use tobacco
of submitted product samples.
products.33
the findings in this report support several
disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with
public health recommendations issued by the
the full text of this article at nejm.org.
cdc.33 since no single product or substance has
we thank the staff of the wisconsin department of health
been associated with the illness, persons should services and illinois department of public health and numerous
consider not using e-cigarettes while this inves- local health departments and hospitals who played a critical role
in this investigation and collected the information provided in
tigation is ongoing, especially those purchased this article; members of the investigative team, including carrie
from sources other than authorized retailers tomasallo and barbara grajewski of the wisconsin department
(e.g., e-cigarette products with thc) and those of health services; connie austin, judy kauerauf, and matt
charles of the illinois department of public health; and michael
modified in a manner not intended by the gutzeit, lynn d’andrea, and lori loof of the children’s hospital
manufacturer. adult smokers who are attempt- of wisconsin, for their recognition of the cluster and assistance
ing to quit should consult with their health care with the public health investigation; grant t. baldwin, debra
houry, dana meaney-delman, and ileana arias of the centers
provider and use proven treatments. irrespective for disease control and prevention (cdc); and the cdc 2019
of these findings, e-cigarettes should never be lung injury response team.
references
1. surgeon general’s advisory on e-cigarette use among youth. washington, dc:
department of health and human services, office of the surgeon general, 2018
(https://e​-­cigarettes​.surgeongeneral​.gov/​
documents/​surgeon​-­generals​-­advisory​-­on​
-­e​-­cigarette​-­use​-­among​-­youth​-­2018​.pdf).
2. national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine. public health
consequences of e-cigarettes. washington, dc: national academies press, 2018.
3. e-cigarette use among youth and
young adults: a report of the surgeon general. rockville, md: department of
health and human services, 2016.
(https://e​-­cigarettes​.surgeongeneral​.gov/​
documents/​2016_sgr_full_report_508​
.pdf).
4. breitbarth ak, morgan j, jones al. ecigarettes: an unintended illicit drug delivery system. drug alcohol depend 2018;​
192:​98-111.
5. cullen ka, ambrose bk, gentzke as,
apelberg bj, jamal a, king ba. notes
from the field: use of electronic cigarettes
and any tobacco product among middle
and high school students — united
states, 2011–2018. mmwr morb mortal
wkly rep 2018;​67:​1276-7.
6. centers for disease control and prevention. national health interview survey
(https://www​.cdc​.gov/​nchs/​nhis/​data​
-­questionnaires​-­documentation​.htm).
7. sommerfeld cg, weiner dj, nowalk
a, larkin a. hypersensitivity pneumonitis and acute respiratory distress syndrome from e-cigarette use. pediatrics
2018;​141(6):​e20163927.
8. arter zl, wiggins a, hudspath c,
kisling a, hostler dc, hostler jm. acute
eosinophilic pneumonia following electronic cigarette use. respir med case rep
2019;​27:​100825.
9. thota d, latham e. case report of

electronic cigarettes possibly associated
with eosinophilic pneumonitis in a previously healthy active-duty sailor. j emerg
med 2014;​47:​15-7.
10. moore k, young h, ryan mf. bilateral
pneumonia and pleural effusions subsequent to electronic cigarette use. open j
emerg med 2015;​3:​18-22.
11. khan ms, khateeb f, akhtar j, et al.
organizing pneumonia related to electronic cigarette use: a case report and review of literature. clin respir j 2018;​12:​
1295-9.
12. anderson rp, zechar k. lung injury
from inhaling butane hash oil mimics
pneumonia. respir med case rep 2019;​
26:​171-3.
13. he t, oks m, esposito m, steinberg
h, makaryus m. “tree-in-bloom”: severe
acute lung injury induced by vaping cannabis oil. ann am thorac soc 2017;​14:​
468-70.
14. yoon pw, ising ai, gunn je. using
syndromic surveillance for all-hazards
public health surveillance: successes,
challenges, and the future. public health
rep 2017;​132:​ suppl:​3s-6s.
15. national syndromic surveillance program (nssp) (https://www​.cdc​.gov/​nssp/​
biosense/​index​.html).
16. ards definition task force, ranieri
vm, rubenfeld gd, et al. acute respiratory distress syndrome: the berlin definition. jama 2012;​307:​2526-33.
17. floyd el, queimado l, wang j, regens jl, johnson dl. electronic cigarette
power affects count concentration and
particle size distribution of vaping aerosol. plos one 2018;​13(12):​e0210147.
18. burstyn i. peering through the mist:
systematic review of what the chemistry
of contaminants in electronic cigarettes
tells us about health risks. bmc public
health 2014;​14:​18.

19. pisinger c, døssing m. a systematic
review of health effects of electronic cigarettes. prev med 2014;​69:​248-60.
20. lee ms, allen jg, christiani dc. endotoxin and and (1->3-β-d-glucan contamination in electronic cigarette products sold in the united states. environ
health perspect 2019;​127:​47008.
21. allen jg, flanigan ss, leblanc m, et
al. flavoring chemicals in e-cigarettes:
diacetyl, 2,3-pentanedione, and acetoin in
a sample of 51 products, including fruit-,
candy-, and cocktail-flavored e-cigarettes.
environ health perspect 2016;​124:​733-9.
22. al-zouabi i, stogner jm, miller bl,
lane es. butane hash oil and dabbing:
insights into use, amateur production
techniques, and potential harm mitigation. subst abuse rehabil 2018;​9:​91-101.
23. trivers kf, phillips e, gentzke as,
tynan ma, neff lj. prevalence of cannabis use in electronic cigarettes among us
youth. jama pediatr 2018;​172:​1097-9.
24. agustin m, yamamoto m, cabrera f,
eusebio r. diffuse alveolar hemorrhage
induced by vaping. case rep pulmonol
2018;​2018:​9724530.
25. mccauley l, markin c, hosmer d. an
unexpected consequence of electronic
cigarette use. chest 2012;​141:​1110-3.
26. flower m, nandakumar l, singh m,
wyld d, windsor m, fielding d. respiratory bronchiolitis-associated interstitial
lung disease secondary to electronic nicotine delivery system use confirmed with
open lung biopsy. respirol case rep 2017;​
5(3):​e00230.
27. mcmahon mj, bhatt na, stahlmann
cg, philip ai. severe pneumonitis after
inhalation of butane hash oil. ann am
thorac soc 2016;​13:​991-2.
28. gillman ig, kistler ka, stewart ew,
paolantonio ar. effect of variable power
levels on the yield of total aerosol mass

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

13

the

n e w e ng l a n d j o u r na l

and formation of aldehydes in e-cigarette
aerosols. regul toxicol pharmacol 2016;​
75:​58-65.
29. jensen rp, luo w, pankow jf, strongin rm, peyton dh. hidden formaldehyde in e-cigarette aerosols. n engl j med
2015;​372:​392-4.
30. olmedo p, goessler w, tanda s, et al.
metal concentrations in e-cigarette liquid
and aerosol samples: the contribution of

14

of

m e dic i n e

metallic coils. environ health perspect
2018;​126:​027010.
31. centers for disease control and prevention. health alert network: severe
pulmonary disease associated with using
e-cigarette products. august 30, 2019
(https://emergency​.cdc​.gov/​han/​han00421​
.asp).
32. lipsitch m, donnelly ca, fraser c, et
al. potential biases in estimating absolute

and relative case-fatality risks during outbreaks. plos negl trop dis 2015;​
9(7):​
e0003846.
33. schier jg, meiman jg, layden j, et al.
severe pulmonary disease associated with
electronic-cigarette–product use — interim guidance. mmwr morb mortal wkly
rep 2019;​68(36).
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society.

n engl j med﻿﻿ nejm.org﻿

the new england journal of medicine
downloaded from nejm.org at purdue university libraries on november 12, 2019. for personal use only. no other uses without permission.
copyright © 2019 massachusetts medical society. all rights reserved.

